These indeed I call substantial motions, life, intelligence, saying none of the motions of sensible things nor transition to place. Therefore, these two, life and intelligence, are of the same substance as being, that is, of the soul. These two are one motion, which indeed is the first power of life, for its form is life. For it defines infinite being, which is the first power of motion, but the second power itself is motion; for what is defined, and intelligence is comprehended by life, innate intelligence and substance, according to what it is intelligence and subsisting, and by itself derived from the substance of life. These two are one, and one according to motion is the son, the only-begotten of the soul, suffering nothing of passion according to what is of the soul.

But this is either mother or father of the only-begotten son, proceeding in double power by motion, which alone suffers; for motion is passion, and by motion passion, for in motion motion and state; but being in motion is passion, and being in motion from the state is passion, therefore also motion: therefore all passion is by motion. But this double, according to life and intelligence: according to life indeed passion, because it still needs another which it wants to vivify, and therefore according to what it participates, and otherwise suffers passions even unto death. But according to intelligence, because it also needs what is intelligible, so that intelligence may subsist; it incurs more passions and weaknesses, and is turned by insensible things, and is led around by imagination into false subsistence.

With these existing, suffering these, the soul remains according to substance, keeping in the seed of motion the power of life and intelligence, by which always remaining life and intelligence is kindled, but more it raises up, if into the fountain of life, that is, into Christ, and into the fountain of intelligence, that is, into the Holy Spirit, the resurrected soul rises up.

But these are as in similitude. Of God and of the Word, that is, of the Son Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit using more divine intelligence, let us accept the unity of their same substance.

First to be inquired, if God is the same, and to be God, or something else?

If the same, then to be is, and to act: but if to be God is different, to be God is preexistent, being in power to that which is to be, which truly more is what is to be: for power preexists all things and is the beginning, and is before what truly is.

But this they estimate blessedly, to be in rest altogether in every way: to be in motion only which is the cause of all in whatever motion existing.

And they say this is conceived by foreknowledge, which itself is nothing by itself, but is taken up by the conception of what preexists.

But scripture, and all intelligence, understand this: God and

He says that before Him, there was nothing, and He is that which exists and acts. This is the God we acknowledge and worship, the beginning of all things: for things exist through action, as before action, they do not yet exist. We accept God as active, as in the beginning God made the heavens and the earth, and He made the angels, man, and all things in the heavens and on the earth.

Therefore, this is the true God and the only God, both in power and in action, but eternally: just as Christ is both in power and in action, but already outward and revealed. Thus, the Father God is the first action, the first existence, and substance, and the principal being, generating Himself without beginning, always existing from Himself, infinite in existence, perfect in every way, omnipotent, unchanging, always existing in the same manner, substantial in Himself: the Word existing so that all things might be, not as something else, or as another, but existing together in simplicity and unity as one. For that which the Word is, is the same as that which is existence, and by that which is existence, the Word is: for the Word is God, therefore one and of the same substance. For God is not without action, but God acts, as it is said.

The substance of God is the image, action, and the Son, through whom He is understood and declared to be, as it is written in the Gospel of John, chapter 14, verse 9: "He who has seen Me has seen the Father." And the substance itself exists, having being from itself. For the cause of it is that in which it exists, the image itself is His Son, in whom He exists by ineffable generation, and by the greatest ungenerable generation, or rather by ever-generating generation, as Alexander also said. And it is said that the Father is always, the Son always existing together.

Therefore, always of the same substance, existing together, one existing, the Son is in the Father; and when He acts, He proceeds: when He proceeds, the Father is in the Son. How do we say this? God and the Word are one and united, and therefore of the same substance, but as God, according to what God is, whose being is power, and of all things that are, to that which is being, the cause is the Word according to what it is: the Word is the paternal power, to make that which is being exist: the principal being, and the beginning, and the perfection. For from that which is universal being, and above universal being all universal being, and according to genera, and according to species being, and individuals, that which is being has. If therefore the Word has being, for the Word is that which is being itself and the Word, therefore from that which is above universal being, being is: but the universal being is the Word: but God is that which is above universal being, and the Son is that which is universal being: therefore the Father is above universal being, of the same substance in that which is being, to that which is being, and that which is above universal being to the universal: this indeed is also a progression; for from that which is above universal, the universal proceeds, and certainly proceeds more to the understanding, and remains, for the universal is not abandoned.

Therefore, what is universal subsists by itself and is within that which is above universal: therefore it is connected, and inseparable; and this is called the radiance of light, having all of the light, but not receiving, nor being born, but con-natural, always existing of the same substance. Therefore not by local motion, nor by change: for the Father is unchangeable, and the Son is unchangeable, and always the Father, always the Son, even if the Son is believed to be the image existing in the Father, and the form of His being, as it is said, or according to the progression the Son is the radiance of light. With these thus existing, and more one existing, for the radiance is the splendor of light, and it has the light in itself from the Father and is in the light and outward: therefore the Son is in the Father, and what is joined is the splendor of light, more to be the splendor called to the light, not in the light; even if it shines from the light it is in the light, and this signifies (John, chapter 1, verse 1): "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God": therefore of the same substance are the Son and the Father, and always these, and from eternity, and into eternity.

We also say other things. The Word is with God, it is well known. What is the Word? through which...

Everything, and in whom everything, and for whom everything; it is agreed that this is Jesus. The Logos is the Son of God, but Jesus, about whom Paul says in 
Colossians
 1:13: 
"He has rescued us from the power of darkness, and transferred us into the kingdom of the Son of His love."
 So who is this Son? He says in 
Colossians
 1:14, 
"in whom we have redemption, through His blood, the forgiveness of our sins."
 Who is this? The one who was born of Mary. What then? Is it just that? Is it mainly about the one who was from Mary? He existed even before Mary.

What does he introduce in 
Colossians
 1:15, 
"who is the image of God"?
 Is it just about Mary? No: for the image of God is eternally the image. So if we have hope in the Son, and He has redeemed us with His blood; and He is the image of God; then the image is the Son of God. Do I say this? Not alone, but Paul also; for how does he say in 
Colossians
 1:15? 
"The firstborn of all creation."
 Who is the firstborn? The Son. Who is the Son? The Son who is of Mary. Who is the son of Mary? The firstborn of all creation. Who is the firstborn of all creation? The one who is the image of God.

It is necessary that the firstborn be before all creation as the image of God. But who is the image? The Logos. Who is the Logos? The one who was in the beginning: For without the image, how is God? And who is the Logos? 
John
 1:2-3: 
"Who was with God, and through whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made."
 How is the image the Logos? And the Logos the Son? And the same one who is from Mary? But more so, the one who is in the one from Mary. From this it is clear, if the Son of God redeemed us with His blood, who is the son of Mary, and He is the image of God; He is the Son of God: for if He is the firstborn of all creation, necessarily the son, is He another? By no means: for He is the only-begotten Son of God. It is necessary, therefore, that He be the same Son, and image, and the one who is from Mary. For how is the image of God the Son if not the firstborn of all creation? And how is the image of God, the one who is the Son from Mary, born after all? It is clear, therefore, that He is the firstborn.

What then of the one born of Mary? Is he not a creature? But if the Son of God, the image of God, is born before all creation, He is the one in Him who was born of Mary. It is therefore clear that He is the only-begotten.

After that, it must be seen how the same one is both the image and the Son and the Logos. It is agreed that the image is the Son. For Paul said in 
Colossians
 1:15: 
"The Son of God is the image of God."
 I say He is the Logos, of whom it is said: 
"In the beginning was the Logos."
 For Paul says how the Son is the firstborn of all creation, that in 
Colossians
 1:16-18 
"in Him all things were created, in the heavens and on the earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities. All things were created through Him and for Him: and He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together."
 You see what he said about the Son, that He is the firstborn, because all things were created by Him, and through Him, and for Him. So, he says three things, from which it is said, all things by Him, to whom it is given always, which is in the confession to the Logos.

If Paul gave to the Son by Him; but what is by Him, John gave to the Logos first among the Apostles and Evangelists: all agree in their words. Why doubt, then, that the Son is the Logos? What about the other two things he gave to the Son, whose own are they more? Necessarily of the Logos; for His power is the subsistence of all things. But if also, in Him all things are, as it is said, that in Him all things were created, and therefore in Him all things, because all spiritual things will be made, which Paul also signifies, in the consummation of the world in 
First Corinthians
 15:28: 
"For when all things are subjected to Him, then the Son Himself will also be subjected to the one who subjected all things to Him, so that God may be all in all."
 What is this, and how afterward? Now how spiritual things. It is true then that the Son of Mary is the Son of God, and He is the image and He is the Logos, and He is before the ages and all creation, and that all creation was made through Him, and for Him, and from Him, and consequently what has been said.

Who then is senseless, who is the sacrilegious Arius?

Who sees without God? Jesus? And where does the only begotten Son come from?

However, both God and the Word being of the same essence, that is, both the Father and the Son, is clear from these:

What Paul gave to the Son, he also gave to the Father, these three with paternal dignity in one, so that both divinity and substance, and paternal power appear as one.

He said this about the Son in the letter to the Colossians.

But in the letter to the Romans about the Father, he said the same:

For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor? Or who has given a gift to him that he might be repaid?

For from him and through him and to him are all things.

Do you see how the same things are given to both the Father and the Son, in the same essence?

First three and three, then the same to both the Father and the Son: and this by whom all things are given to both the Father and the Son.

Because the Son is the Word, who is the active power of all things, in those things which exist, and because the Father is in the Son, the Father also exists as active power in him:

For the Son is in the Father, and the Father is in the Son:

Therefore one power, that is, one substance exists:

For where there is power, there is substance: power is not different from substance.

Therefore, the same is true for both the Father and the Son.

This by whom all things exist, and the Son himself: this therefore is proper to the Father: in whom all things exist, which is the Word and the place: for he himself is the receptacle of deeds and works through himself.

Where all things exist, the fullness is made: for Jesus is the Father of all works, those through himself.

Therefore, the Father and the Son are one.

But the works do not enter from the outside: where from then?

For there is nothing outside; therefore, all things are in himself:

Therefore, he is both the receptacle and the inhabitant.

And because the Father is in the Son, and the Father is the inhabitant: therefore, it is proper to the Son in whom all things exist, therefore this, and in himself, I say, is common:

For in the end all things are one, and therefore Paul says to the Corinthians:

There is one God the Father from whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus, through whom are all things, and we through him.

Or how is another in him?

For in other places it is so stated of the Father, from whom are all things, through whom are all things, in whom are all things.

But of the Son, in whom are all things, through whom are all things, in whom are all things:

Therefore, Paul gave all things equally to both the Father and the Son: rightly.

Because the Father and the Son are of the same essence, and therefore it is said:

Then the Son himself will also be subjected to him who put all things in subjection under him, that God may be all in all.

See the power of the one speaking; he leads (or perhaps concludes) the same essence:

The Son subjects all things to the Father by his own power, as it seems, but as it is paternal: for he says:

He will be subjected to him who put all things under him.

To whom will he be subjected? To God.

Who will be subjected? The Son, to whom God subjects all things.

Therefore, the action is both of the Father and the Son. Where then is the substance?

In which the action itself is, and more so, the action, which is the substance, therefore the same essence.

Paul also says this:

When he delivers the kingdom to God and the Father. He himself therefore now reigns, and according to his own action Christ subjects all things, and destroys enmities and even death itself:

He himself therefore subjects, as Paul says, when he abolishes all power.

Thus he says that the Son does these things by his own power.

He adds this too:

For he must reign.

Indeed, God is the king of all:

But because the Son is of the same essence, and especially the Word, that is, the power and wisdom of God; it is necessary that wisdom reigns first, through which all things are subjected;

For by the Word all things exist and are subjected:

For it is said, and it was said, that the Word that is the Son, subjects all things, and therefore Paul adds:

Until he makes all his enemies a footstool for his feet.

Who? Whose? Clearly, because the Son of the Father.

But because the Father is in the Son, therefore the Father subjects all things to the Son, and therefore the Son especially has enemies, not the Father:

And because both, that is, a good ambiguity of understanding, and therefore of the same essence:

The last enemy to be destroyed is death:

For if Jesus is life and eternal life, death will be destroyed by life:

Therefore all things Jesus, that is, the Son subjects to the Father.

But because he is of the same essence as the Father and the substance itself, and the power itself, and the same...

According to what it means to be a father, and what it means to be first, and then to act, live, and understand, since the cause of the two is what is first; it is necessary to say the father is subject to the son.

So, he says, when he hands over the Kingdom to God and the Father, necessarily the Son; and when he renders all rule and power empty, necessarily the Son. He says again 
First Corinthians
 15:27: "When everything is subjected, it is clear that except for the one who subjects everything to him: not a small understanding."

But now let us move on. What does he want us to understand, that God, the cause who is, and all-powerful, and the principal power, made everything, when the Son acts? And if the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father, he acts in the Son, what the Son did; and 
John
 5:19: "What the Father does, the Son does equally." Therefore, all things are given either to the Father or the Son, whether actions or rest: for in one to the other, and nothing of the other, because in one the other. And therefore, one alone, and nothing else, but the Father and Son are distinct persons, from one substance of the Father. The Son, that is, the Word, is active power, and what acts, and what gives life, and is intelligent: therefore creates everything justly and acts according to life, and regenerates according to the understanding of truth and God, which Jesus, being the Word, gives to all, both of all minds and universally of all things that are. If therefore he creates, and he regenerates everything, he subjects everything, not only humans, but also as Paul says, every rule and every power; does he do this as a man, or as the Word?

Indeed, subjecting itself is not only since the time he became the Son from Mary, but also before, and after. For if the flood happened, if Sodom and Gomorrah were burned, if these and many such things happened, if in the first presence he triumphs over enemies in himself, if in the second presence the last enemy, death, will be abolished; the Son, the Word, does these things, but with paternal power. Therefore, the spirit does all spiritual things, then he himself will be subjected to God, who subjects everything to him: for when everything is emptied, the active power rests, and God will be in him according to what it means to be, and according to what it means to rest: but in all others spiritually, according to his own power and substance. And this is 
First Corinthians
 15:28, so that God may be all in all: for not everything is in each one, but God existing in all, and therefore God will be everything, because everything will be full of God.

Let us also say other things 
Romans
 1:16: "For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of God." Paul calls Christ Jesus power and might, for this is what he calls the Gospel and about this 
First Corinthians
 1:24: "Christ therefore is the wisdom and power of God." What then of the wisdom and power of God? Is he not God himself? For it is not as in bodies or corporeal things, where the eye is one thing, vision another. Or in fire, where the fire is one thing, its light another: for the eye and the fire need something else, and the eye needs another light, to be from it and in it; the vision of fire and air, to be from it light. But just as the power of vision has vision in itself when the power of vision is active, and vision is generated from the power of vision, the only-begotten itself: for nothing else is generated from it, and to the power of vision, vision is not only inward, but also inward in power, more outward in action, and therefore to power, since vision exists, vision is of the same essence as the power of vision, and one whole. And the power indeed rests, but vision is in motion: and through vision, all visible things are made, and the passions around vision exist, with the power of vision being impassible and generating vision without passion. So, therefore, both the power and the wisdom of God are God himself, the whole, which is simple, and which is one, and of the same substance, and simultaneously from eternity, and always, and from the Father, who is his own generator. Therefore, wisdom and the power of action, this indeed signifies power now: for he joined wisdom and power. Therefore, the power of these is God, and therefore the Father, because from him are these: for he generates these into action and impassibly.

Because power and action, and God, and God's power and wisdom are consubstantial, when they are active, they take care of things outside and are always giving wisdom to God, always giving life, not God, but through themselves, everything created by God. And if any passion exists, it is a passion in action.

In this way, whether Jesus is the Word, or light, or radiance, or form, or image, or power and wisdom, or character, or life, the Word and God the Father, and the Son, the Spirit, and Christ, will appear consubstantial.

Let us bring in the same things again. When we call Christ life, how is he consubstantial with God?

John says in 
John 1:3-4
, "What was made had life in itself." And again, in 
John 5:26
, "Just as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself."

What is so simultaneous? What is so identical? The Father has life in himself: the Son also has life in himself. What does it mean to have life in oneself? To be life itself, not to receive life from another, but to give it to oneself and others.

Someone might say it is of similar substance, but not consubstantial. That has been stated already, because similar substance is not spoken of: for it is not according to what substance is, but more if it is of the same substance, it is called the same substance, not similar, for similar is according to qualities, as fire is substance, and air is the same in substance, for both are matter: but in qualities similar or dissimilar, in the notion of virtues, and other similarities.

Say earth and water in gravity and density, or other such things, in which it happens that whatever are similar, are also dissimilar, each having different qualities. For similar is not the same, nor the same one, but the same twin: one, and these are not substance, but one in number.

We are now inquiring about substance, which is in God, or the Son, or is itself, or the same: or in a certain way both itself and the same. How then is it itself when the Son is present, doing so many things both in heaven and on earth, and entering into flesh?

How is Jesus the Son, which signifies the Father, how are there three substances, God, the Word, the Holy Spirit: for it is not right to say, nor permissible to say, that there is one substance, three persons. For if this same substance both did everything and suffered, then we are Patripassians: God forbid.

What then? It is the same, but not itself: but if this, or with pre-existing substance two, or from the same by division, or by loss of part of the same, it became the same: neither by division nor by diminution was the Son born, but the Father is perfect, and always perfect, and always Father: the Son is perfect, and always perfect, and from eternity and to eternity the Son. How then the same, in two things that are the same? but the Father and the Son are one, and who is Father, Father: and who is Son, Son.

And the Father and the Son are not the same, nor the Son the Father of whom he is the Son. Therefore they are not one: neither itself, nor is the same substance. So it remains that in a certain way it is both itself and the same. For it is not right to say that the Father and the Son are of a different substance: because we will say that it is itself, whether we say God and the Word, or God and God's power and wisdom.

Whether what is being and life, or what is being understanding, or understanding life, or the Father and the Son, or light and radiance, or God and character, or God and form and image, or substance and species, as there, not as here, or substance and motion, or power and action, or silence and utterance itself to be the substance.

For saying that God is being, the Son is life; how do we separate life from being, whether in the Father or in the Son? For indeed the Father has life in himself, and the Son, except that the Son received what he has from the Father. Therefore the Father and the Son originated from themselves, powerful in life from themselves, understand how to say having, as the Gospel says, for the Father has life in himself. Having then, not as another but itself, but in understanding.

We have said these things. So if the Father has life in himself, he is life, and substance.

Her life is, and so is the son's. For he says in 
John
 14:6: "I am life." Therefore, the Father is life, and the Son is life. All life as life is, is motion, giving life to those who can be revived. Therefore, the definition of soul and life is this: to move itself to be.

And as its substance is called, much more so in God and the Word. What then did we say? The Father is life and substance, and a self-moving substance. Nothing else is self-moving motion except life itself, therefore both substance and life. Since in motion, intelligence is almost perceived as something else, and not perfectly another. But living itself is as if mixed in both with the other, as life is, and motion is, it is one.

Again, as life is, it is one in itself and another, and therefore the same substance. But whether it is itself, or the same, 
homoousion
 necessarily and simultaneously; since two are simultaneous; for without the other, the other never was. Therefore, one and one are these. Therefore, this is being life, and being motion through itself, the Father is. But this being motion, and being life through itself, the Son is.

For the cause of motion is life. Therefore, the Father is more principal life, having motion resting in the hidden, and moving within. But the Son is motion in the manifest, and therefore the Son, since he proceeded from what is within, is more motion, which is in the manifest. In this way also the Son is life from the Father, who thus takes life from the principal principle. The universal born from the universal, whole from whole.

And therefore he says in 
John
 6:58: "The living Father sent me, and I live because of him." Therefore, if the begetter is in life, and the Son according to motion is the Son, but according to motion is life, the Father gives life to the Son in motion, generation, and life simultaneously, and he himself 
homoousion
 in himself. Therefore, the Father and Son are one always, and born from eternity, and one in the other, and inseparable separation. And in the Father, the Son, and in the Son, the Father, and the Son is especially action.

Since the Son with action is life, but the Father according to what is to be, is life, and according to what is to be life, is action. Therefore, the Father remains, and remains impassible. The Son operates, and leads into manifestation. And God operates within, with action existing according to power. And in the Father, and in the Son, there is action according to action.

These things should be referred back to all that we have previously stated: whether God is the Word, or light and radiance, or silence and utterance, or other things by which one and the same 
homoousion
 appears, and unbegotten generation. Therefore, where does what is similar to 
homoousion
 have a place to say? For what reason is it said?

Always and the whole mystery is this: One God, and Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit one God. How then is the similar one God? But 
homoousion
 necessarily one God. For if not simultaneously, necessarily two; but if that similar one is another, necessarily another 
homoousion
; therefore necessarily of another substance. These Arians, these Lucianists, these Eusebians, these Illyrians, but rejecting some, taking away some and changing, all heretics of different opinions.

This is added, if the Father and Son are 
homoousion
, how does the Savior say in 
John
 14:6: "I am the truth"? If what is said is true, the Son, since he is the truth, the Father is lesser, similar to the truth, not the truth. How much blasphemy is this?

But if the truth is God, the truth is the Son, as the Son himself says, and truly says, 
homoousion
 God is the Son. Therefore not double, but always one truth, and very far, and very low, which is similar to the truth, which perhaps in the world exists as a likeness of the truth, where also error, and corruption, and all passion exists.

Therefore, being the truth itself is substance; for substance is not different from the truth. For what is simple, this is the truth, simple God, simple Son, truth God, truth Son, and God and Son one truth. For the truth in itself is truth.

Again, if the Son is similar to the truth, that is, what is similar leads, what leads? But if the truth, it leads into the truth. But indeed it leads to God.

God is truth, and He leads into truth. But it is impossible for Him, not being truth Himself, to lead into truth; therefore the Father and the Son are truth, as it is said in 
John
, chapter 6, verse 37: "All those that the Father gives me will come to me." From all these things, it is not only concluded but clearly established that there is no change or movement in God. For there is no local generation, nor generation with passion, corruption, increase, or decrease, nor any kind of change; for to move there is to be, and being itself is simple and one in understanding, power, and action.

Always indeed, 
ὁμοούσιον
 (of one substance) in being, and in action from being, both the Son and the Father. But as it is said, the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father.

Is there any fear from this, that we may seem to be Patripassians by saying these things? The serpent's doctrine differs greatly from the truth. For they say that God alone, whom we call Father, is the only being and maker of all, and that He came not only into the world but also into the flesh, and did all other things which we say the Son did. If we call the Father, Father, and the Son, Son, one and the same, and therefore 
λόγος
 (Word), which is one, not only saying one but one and the same. One is impassible, the other has suffered, so how are we Patripassians?

For God does not proceed from Himself, nor is His action manifest, nor as in motion: what is within is not motion; but the 
λόγος
 in the power of motion is more motion and action, carried by its power into the effecting of things that are. For where there is 
λόγος
, there is the cause of things that are; where the cause is, it does not always remain in itself, which is in what 
λόγος
 is. And in this way, it is unchangeable and immutable, but in things according to their kinds: which are different from each other, by the universal 
λόγος
, remaining the same in the Father.

So where are the passions? Neither in the Father nor in the Son, but according to their own kind, not to be received, the entire power of the 
λόγος
, whatever universal: each one existing and distributing its own, like Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers, souls, and sensible things, even flesh itself. Therefore, passion in these, and according to these, not of the 
λόγος
, that is, the Son. According to the flesh, the Savior suffered, but according to the spirit, He was without passion. Thus our doctrine differs from that of the Patripassians.

For it is not the Son's suffering, as said, nor doing anything nor speaking: all things are done by divine power without passion, and this is more clearly divine and substantial motion, not passion. Moreover, the Patripassians did not arise from this, but from the cross: sacrilegiously saying that the Father was crucified, implicating the impassible in passion, and not understanding that something impassible must necessarily exist if there is something that suffers. We, however, say that the Son is impassible, but according to the 
λόγος
 made flesh, passible.

Yet compassion, anger, joy, and sorrow, and other such things are not passions there, but nature and substance. If therefore the spirit is benevolent, He Himself is good in Himself, to some leading to life, to others to death; not changed in His nature, but by the material and will of those suffering, the unchangeable divinity is said to be affected as appropriate or otherwise, or to suffer: because we judge divine things by our senses. For in sensible things, according to the animal, which is the soul using the body, or the animated body, it is said to suffer according to sense: but truly the passions are not of the soul alone, much less of the spirit of the 
λόγος
 and God. For the divine nature is impassible.

Let the Patripassians depart, for we say both Father and Son, He alone passible according to movement in matter. Let the Arians depart, for we say the Son is of the same nature, begotten before all creation. Let those who say Christ is from the being of God, who is God, also depart: for we say the Son is of the nature, and from the Father.

And in the Father. Let the disciples of Marcellus and Photinus depart, for we say that the Word was in the flesh, not that there is one Word and another man in whom they say Christ is, but that the Word itself took on flesh. For they say that there is God, and the Word, and the Spirit, but a fourth son, that is, a man from Mary, whom the Word assumed and ruled as a servant, and to whom they say a seat is prepared. Thus, they have fallen away from the Trinity.

If, however, the Trinity remains alone, the man and the Word; whom we have shown above as the Son. This does not mean: and the Word became flesh, as if the Word was corrupted and turned into flesh, but the Word through whom all things were made, and all made, and became flesh so that being in the flesh, he might redeem the whole man through his passion and death according to the sufferings of the body. For if the man from Mary was not himself, why did he empty himself? And what is 
Philippians
 2:7 "taking the form of a servant"? And what again is 
John
 1:14, "and the Word became flesh"? Let the followers of Basil depart, the homoousians. For we say homoousion, both in truth and according to the Synod in Nicaeapoli. For thus both the Father and the Son are one, always, and together, and because they are homoousion.

But what they call homoousion, even if they confess that the Son has substance from the Father, they say something else, saying that the Son is neither by generation nor by making from God, but by the compulsion of these two, generation and making, like a stone and iron, and from there a flame is emitted. Those who say such things are hidden Arians. Firstly, not saying that the Son of God is by generation, but by making, which is the doctrine of Arius; for making is that which leaps forth from compulsion and is from nothing. For a flame is not from iron or stone, which Arius madly believes. Even if a collision was made, there was a time when it was not: and if the Son was made by the compulsion of making and generation, then making and generation existed before the Son. These are later matters. How then is there compulsion? And this is of Arius: then how is there this collision? And of whom and in what? Is it a collision of wills in God? Is it of passions or different movements, especially contrary motions? And if the Father, who is without passion, suffered this, and the Son did not appear from his own substance: for by the collision of two either wills or passions, neither will nor passion was made, much less substance from the paternal substance, but some substance from outside, which would exist from nothing about the Word to the Father. To suspect this is impious blasphemy.

We have spoken about homoousion, and we have spoken sufficiently: for this was our purpose. But how, if homoousion, the Son is always with the Father, and proceeds, and descends, and ascends, and is sent, and does what is of the Father's will, and how, being the image of God, he sits at the right hand of God, and what is the right hand, and what is sitting, and what is through whom all things were made, and how all things, and what is "nothing was made without him," and how he has a will, and what he does, he does by the will of the Father, and how he is perfect, and from a perfect Father as imperfect he took on a body, and now bears a body, and if it is holy and spiritual, and like those of men, who after will be holy, and how always moves, and generated from himself by the power of the Father: for all these things define homoousion. If anyone is worthy to understand, he will find in this book that Faith is so, and we say this by the permission of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, lest anyone understanding my doctrine blasphemously say, for everything is said and is from the holy scripture.

We will say especially that from which many heresies arise, that the Gospels, and the Apostle, and all the old Scripture say everything about God, and about Jesus Christ, that is about the incarnate Word, for he performed the mystery of our salvation, he made us free, he redeemed us: in him we believe according to the cross, and according to the resurrection from the dead our Savior, therefore Paul says: "For I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ, and him crucified" 
First Corinthians
.

Chapter 2, 2

We confess, therefore, God the Father Almighty,

we confess the only-begotten Son Jesus Christ,

God from God, true light from true light,

the form of God, who has the substance from God's substance,

nature, generation, the Son together with the Father,

of the same substance, which the Greeks call 
ὁμοούσιος
,

firstborn before the creation of the world, and firstborn

before every creature, that is, both before

the essence of coming into being, and generation, and revival,

firstborn from the dead, the Word, who is the universal

Word of all, the Word to God, the Word in the last

times incarnate, and by the cross overcoming

death and all sin, our Savior,

judge of all, always of the same substance with the Father

and 
ὁμοούσιος
, active power from the Father's power, and

generating, and making all things, and the essence

of existence of all, and generation, and revival:

since life is eternal, and God's power, and wisdom:

He Himself is unchangeable, immutable,

as the Word is, and as He is always the Word:

but as He creates all things, and especially in

the action on matter, suffering without being affected. As a fountain of waters

unchangeable, unaffected, outside all motion,

when it flows, and comes into the river, believed to suffer according to the channel and

kinds and qualities of the land, always preserving

the power of its water, and as the river irrigates the land,

feeling no diminution, in what it is

to be water; so Christ is that river, of whom

the Prophet says: Who waters and fills the whole earth

(Genesis 2:6): but Christ waters everything, both visible

and invisible, with the river of life of all things which

are substance. In whom is life, that is Christ:

in whom the Holy Spirit waters, in whom is the power

of vitality, the Father and God: but all is one

God. We confess, therefore, also the Holy Spirit from God

the Father having all things, as the Word, that is, Jesus Christ

delivering to Him all things, which Christ has from the Father. And

in this way we confess that these three,

from this one, and one God, are of the same substance,

and always together, and the Father, and the Son, and the Holy

Spirit of ineffable power, and inexpressible generation

the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who is the Word, and

God, and image, and form, and character, and

radiance of the Father, and power, and wisdom of God,

through which God appears and is declared in the power of all,

and existing, and remaining, and doing all things according to

the action of the Son, that is, Jesus Christ, whom incarnate,

and crucified, and rising from the dead,

and ascending into heaven, and sitting at the right hand

of the Father, and coming as the future judge of the living and the dead,

the Father of all creation and the Savior, we confess

with voice and whole heart always, amen. Grace

and peace from God the Father, and His Son Jesus Christ our

Lord, to the one confessing these things in all ages of ages.

Spirit, Word, mind, wisdom, substance,

whether all are the same, or different from each other? And if

the same, by some communion, or universality? If

by some communion, what is first, what from the other,

and by what communion? if by universality both these, and what

difference, and what communion? if they are altogether different

in every way, one in the other as subject, the other as accident:

or according to another mode? If therefore altogether

different, and 
ἑτερόνυμα
, and of different substance.

But nothing is of altogether different substance: for

of those which are, the kind of being, and more the kind in that which

is being. But since being is in two ways, and being itself

is in two ways, there is truly being, and there is only being. If

therefore being, truly being and only being to all beings, and

only being to only being, whether they are called synonymously or homonymously,

they are not altogether different: therefore by participation

of a certain communion all things which

are, are related to others. For that which is, this

which is not, is opposed, as contrary according to

privation with no participation to each other;

therefore neither is it in the other. If therefore those things which are, even if different

and other, are yet by a certain communion the same,

and in this way both the same and different they are.

In two ways, either in identity or the same in otherness; but if the same in otherness, they incline more towards otherness. But if different in identity, identity appears most clearly. Therefore, it is necessary to examine what harmonizes with these things.

Concerning God and the Word, that is, about the Father and the Son, it has been sufficiently said, with God's permission, since the two are one. It has also been said about the Word, that is, about the Son and the Holy Spirit, that they are in one. If therefore the two are one, and in one two; that one in which the two are, since it is with that one and has been with it from eternity always: those things that are together and mutually the same, the two are one; therefore, it is necessary that these are the same. How this is: