In the first discussion of this work, many strong points, and some of them even stronger, were proposed and discussed by you, my dear friend Candidus.

Although they have been refuted as they should have been, we wanted to hear these things from their letters so that by refuting these, we may also overcome those by their refutation.

First, the opinions of Arius and Eusebius need to be defined: where they agree with us, where they differ, and where they seem to contradict themselves.

Arius says that the Son is not unbegotten.

Likewise, Eusebius says that there are not two unbegotten beings.

We also hold this opinion.

Arius says that the Son is not a part of the unbegotten, nor is he from any subject; Eusebius agrees with these two points.

And he adds: nor is the unbegotten divided into two; which means the Son is not a part of the unbegotten.

But Eusebius says: neither a part nor an emanation, he says.

We similarly deny this: for the Son is neither a part of the Father nor an emanation that, by flowing from him, makes him less from where it flowed.

Indeed, we cannot bear the idea of being from a non-subject: not because we say that we are from any subject, but because we are from the Father as the Son.

Arius says the Son exists by the will of God before times and ages.

Eusebius says the same: we say before all ages and before all times; but we say begotten, not made, not created, not founded.

Arius says: the Son is made, namely fully God, the only begotten, unchangeable, who before he was created, did not exist because he is not unbegotten.

Eusebius says the same, adding that the Son is like the one who made everything: we, on the other hand, say not similar, but the same, since he is of the same substance.

Furthermore, Eusebius adds that the origin of the Son cannot be known by man, nor by any higher power or thought, and yet he dares to say that the Son is a creation, existing by the will and decision of the Father, not from anything existing.

This is not to say the origin of the Son: for if he says this, he is from non-existence, he is not of the Father, neither part, nor emanation.

He not only knows the principles but also the reasons of the principles.

If not, what audacity is it to say: This is God, this is Christ: this is the Father, this is the Son?

But we say, the Father as the Father, the Son as the Son.

And first, as he believed he proved in five verses that the Son was made, not born; so we will teach that the Son was first born according to all sacred reading.

Then that same thing, that is, the Son substantially, with the permission of God's spirit, as we can, we will assert.

And from this, the first beginning should be taken.

Paul to the Ephesians, 
Ephesians 3:14-21
:

For this reason, I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named, that He would grant you, according to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened with might through His Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith; that you, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all the saints what is the width and length and depth and height— to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge; that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.

Now to Him who is able to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, to Him be glory in Christ Jesus, and in the church, throughout all generations, forever and ever. Amen.

What appears from this is that it is possible to know God and the Son of God: and how the Father, how the Son?

It is also in the Gospel according to John, 
John 1:18
:

No one has seen God at any time. The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He has declared Him.

Therefore, it is possible to speak about God, and thus about the Son.

For who has declared the Father? The Son.

Who is he? He who is in the bosom.

Therefore, the Son not only proceeded but is also always in the bosom, a sufficient teacher about the Father.

What did he declare? How God is.

And the Jews and the heathens have declared before: so what did he declare? That the Father is God, and he himself is the Son, and that he is of the same substance, and that he came from the Father.

For he says, 
John 8:19
: Neither know me, nor my Father.

If you knew me, you would know my Father too. This would never be said unless the Son and the Son substantially:

If you knew me, you would know the Father. For if it were a fiction, the Father would not be known through Him, but the power of God and divinity, as Paul said: 

Romans
 chapter 1, verse 20. For His wonders are known, understood from the creation of the world through the things that have been made: His eternal power and divinity. And the Holy Spirit explained about Christ, as the Savior says in the Gospel according to John chapter 16, verse 16: 
 The Holy Spirit whom the Father will send in my name, He will teach you all things. If these things are thus, we have learned about both the Father and the Son in the holy scriptures, and from the spirit which a holy man has as his teacher of faith.

So let us speak of the scriptures, and first according to John: for he says, in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Does he speak of another word? Absolutely of the Son. 
 What then is the Word, if it is not from any subject? How does the Word have power, so that all things are created through Him, He who is from no subject? For it is impossible for the seed of all things that are to be made from nothing. Then if He was in the beginning, how is He the beginning: according to what is the beginning, without a beginning: He who was in the beginning, was always. What then is the audacity? What is the blasphemy? It is not that He was not at any time, as John often says: The Word was in the beginning, was with God, was God the Word Himself? He was in the beginning with God. For although "was" has the significance of past time, frequently without a beginning; but here it must be understood without a beginning, since he said: In the beginning was. Which you also signify before times, before ages saying: All things, he says, were made through Him, and without Him nothing was made that was made. For without the Word what is there, that does not receive its being? For only the Word, as the Word, is both for Himself and for others that which is, He Himself provides for all things that are. And therefore equal indeed to the Father. For the principal cause and for Himself and for others, He is the cause, power, and substance. Being the cause. But the Father is beyond cause. Therefore, the Son differs in that He moves and acts in manifestation, with the great divinity working incomprehensibly for us through the Father. For above blessedness is the Father and therefore rests. For to work also, if it operates imperfection, in the trouble of motion: this is blessedness, as it is to work perfectly.

Therefore, listen to another thing. What is to be, the Father is: what is to work, the Word; and to be is first; second is to work. Indeed, it has itself to be, an inherent operation: for if by motion, this is, by operation, which is life or what intellect is: therefore, it is not only to be, but that which is first to be, because of which it is for Him to rest alone in being: in this way also what is to work, which is second, because not inside, but when it works outside, it is called working. For by the appearance of operation, both is and is named operation, and as the generation of itself, it is both considered and is: thus therefore that which is to work, also has being, but more so does not have: for to work is to be; for both simply and to be and to work, it is the nature of those things that declare what is above and assigned: according to what it is to rest, itself being and substance; but according to what it is to be in motion, action, operation: but this which it is to be in motion, is a declaration of what it is to be according to action. And therefore it was the true light, which enlightens every man coming into the world. Therefore the Word is the true light; and therefore what was made, in Him was life, and the life was the light of men: and the Word Himself, the true light, was in the world, and the world was made through Him; who is the Son of God, of whom it says: No one has ever seen God: the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, He has declared about the Word.

He said and joined everything above about the Son, declaring no other son than the Word. The Word was...

So then, the Son is with God, and in the beginning was, and he himself was God. Through him all things were made, and he is the only-begotten. As proceeding from the Father, he was with the Father because of what it means to work. But because he exists in the bosom of the Father, he has declared about the Father, having become the declaration of the Father according to what it means to work.

What is most important is that the Word itself is the Son. He is the light, he is the life. That the Son is God, John says in the same place: 
And
 the Word was God. And again: 

John
 3:13: No one has ascended into heaven except he who descended from heaven.

That the Son is life, in the same place, 
15
: So that whoever believes in him may not perish. And again, in the same place: But may have hope, eternal life. That the Son, in the same place, 
16
: That he gave his only-begotten Son. He said Son, and his, and only-begotten. What more is needed to confirm the true Son?

That he himself is life: So that everyone who believes in him may not perish, but have eternal life. That he himself is the Son, Christ is, in the same place, 
17
: For God did not send the Son to judge the world, but to save the world. That he is light, about him it says, in the same place, 
19
: Because light has come into the world.

John was not the true light, and therefore he says, 
John
 1:20: I am not the Christ, but that I am sent. So John was sent. But Christ the Son, 
John
 3:31, who comes from above, is above all. And again: Coming from heaven. It is said indeed that he was sent by God; as, in the same place, 
17
: For God sent the Son.

But these two things, both coming, and being sent, and the Son in the Father, and the Father in the Son, signify that; because Christ says to the Samaritan woman, 
John
 4:10: You would ask him, and he would give you living water. And again, in the same place, 
13
, 
14
: Everyone who drinks of this water will thirst again: but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst forever: but the water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life.

That Christ is the Savior, in the same place, 
42
: And we know that this is the Savior of the world. That he is the Son of God, 
John
 5:17: My Father is working until now. Who says this? Christ. What blasphemy is it for him to call him Father who is not the Father? What anger of the Jews, in the same place, 
18
, hearing the Father being God, and getting angry at him, who said that he was the Son of God, when he was not the Son of God. For if he had not been, he would not have said so. But he said, and as a worshiper of God he said; therefore he spoke the truth, and for this reason the unbelief of the Jews is punished.

After these things, every response to the Jews, and declares the Son as Christ, and the Father as God, in the same place, 
19-21
: What the Father does, I also do: the Son does nothing by himself, unless he sees the Father doing it: for the Father loves the Son: the Father raises the dead, and the Son also raises. In the same place, 
26
: The Father has life in himself, and the Son has life. And indeed thereafter. That the Word is the Son, and the Son is Christ, in the same place, 
38
: And you do not have his Word abiding in you, because whom he sent, you do not believe.

That the Son, 
John
 6:32: My Father gives you the true bread from heaven. That Christ is not a man from man, in the same place, 
33
: For the bread of God is he who comes down from heaven. That he is life: And giving life to the world. And later he says, in the same place, 
35
: I am the bread of life. That he is from God, in the same place, 
46
: No one has seen the Father except the one who is from the Father.

That the Father and the Son are in each other, in the same place, 
58
: Just as the living Father sent me, if the Son is life, the living Father, the Son is in the Father: just as the first is quality, then quality; so the living God first, then life. For the one who begot life, is living: life lives from the living Father. For life does not precede, and so God is living, but God is living first. So life, and so living life. And therefore he then says, in the same place: And I live because of the Father. Therefore the Father is also in him. That he is both bread and life, in the same place: And whoever receives me, he will live because of me, in the same place, 
59
: This is the bread that comes down from heaven: Not like your fathers ate, and died, whoever eats this bread will live forever.

Do these words come from a man about himself, who is only a man? For if a man says these things, he blasphemes, and 
John
 9:31

Christ says that God listens to him:
    Therefore, he is neither a sinner nor just a man.
    And it is said in 
Psalm
 107:3: "Vain is the hope in man."
    And it says in 
Psalm
 19:8: "But we trust in our God."
    Therefore, Christ is God, not from another substance.

John
 6:58: "The living Father, and I live because of the Father."
    And 
John
 6:35, 48: "I am the bread of life."

John
 6:59: "Whoever eats this bread will live forever."
    All these signify one substance:
    And therefore, Jesus says that he is from above, who says these things.

John
 6:63: "What if you see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before?"
    That God is spirit is said:

John
 4:24: "God is spirit."
    And that the Son is the living spirit, that this faith is perfect in Christ, Peter says:

John
 6:69, 70: "You have the words of eternal life: and we believe in you, Lord, because you are Christ, the Son of God."

What is the word of eternal life?
    Because if anyone listens to you, they will live forever.
    That from God:

John
 7:29: "I know him because I am from him."
    That the substance of the Father is Christ:

John
 14:10, 11: "I am in the Father, and the Father is in me."
    This is not only through dignity but through substance.

For if it were only through dignity, how does he say:

John
 14:28: "My Father is greater than I am: and the Father sends, and the Son is sent?"
    Again, dignity is given to the Son by the Father:
    According to this, therefore, the Father is in the Son.
    Does the Son also give dignity to the Father, who does not have substance?
    Therefore, the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father.

But these things, and again, Christ himself, who is the Son of the Father, is also the Holy Spirit:

John
 7:37, 38: Jesus stood and cried out: "If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink. Whoever believes in me, as the Scripture has said, rivers of living water will flow from within them."
    This was said about the Spirit that those who believed in him were to receive; for the Spirit had not yet been given because Jesus had not yet been glorified.

But again, the rivers of the Spirit, and the belly from which the rivers flow, are Jesus; for Jesus is the Spirit.
    Therefore, Jesus is the belly from which the rivers of the Spirit flow.
    Just as from the bosom of the Father, and in the bosom the Son, so from the belly of the Son the Spirit;
    Therefore, the three are consubstantial; and therefore, in all things, there is one God.

What is not from the world:

John
 8:3: "I am the light of the world;"
    for because of him the world lives, and will live as long as it obeys him.
    That all three are spirits, it is already said:

John
 4:24: "God is spirit."
    And to some who said:

John
 8:19: "Where is your Father?"
    he said: "You do not know me or my Father: If you knew me, you would also know my Father."
    The Holy Spirit is clearly the Spirit; but all these things are from the Father and from the Father:
    therefore, consubstantial.

For not a spirit like others:
    for they are from God, not of God:
    therefore, these three are consubstantial.
    That the Son is true:

John
 16:27, 28: "For I came from God, as from the bosom of the Father, and I come into the world."
    That before he was in the flesh, he was Christ:

John
 8:56, 58: "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it and was glad."
    And again: "Before Abraham was, I am."

That he is not just a man:

John
 9:5: "While I am in the world, I am the light of the world."
    Who gave sight to the blind man? A man? Impossible:
    and I, who am the Son of God:

John
 9:35-37: "Do you believe in the Son of God?"
    He answered: "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?"
    Jesus said to him: "You have seen him, and it is he who is speaking with you."

That he is of the same substance and power:

John
 10:30: "I and the Father are one."
    And again:

John
 14:10, 11: "The Father is in me, and I am in him."

Hence it is said in Paul:

Philippians
 2:6: "Who, being in the form of God, did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage."
    These, therefore, signify that there is one substance and one power.

How then, are the Father and I one? And how is it that the Father is in me, and I am in the Father, if I did not have the substance and power from the Father, being born whole from the whole? And how is it that he did not consider being equal to the Father something to be grasped? For he did not say, "He did not consider being equal," but, "He did not consider it robbery to be equal." 

Therefore, he wants to be lesser, not wanting to consider it robbery to be equal. For in these things, considering or not considering it robbery to be equal applies to things that are equal. But we thought it was said that he was equal in terms of power. 

First, it is not Arius' doctrine, which says the Father is greater in dignity, power, glory, divinity, and action: for he said they are equal. And if they are equal in this way, it is impossible for them to be equal in this way if they do not have the same substance. For the substance and power, divinity, and action of God are the same: everything is one, and one is simple. This follows: if the Son were from another substance, and especially if from nothing; which substance could receive such divinities and powers? Equality connects to equality, and like to like. Therefore, the Son and the Father are equal, and thus the Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son, and both are one.

But now these things. Let's see those of John. The Savior himself says (John 11:25): 
 I am the resurrection, for he is life. Who is this? Martha says (John 11:27): 
 Because you are the Christ, the Son of God, who came into the world. Which is not the son in the same way as us: for we are adopted sons, he is by nature. Christ is also a son by a certain adoption, but according to the flesh (Psalm 2:7): 
 Today I have begotten you. For if that were the case, he has only a human son: but (John 8:58) 
 Before Abraham was, I am, saying that he was naturally a son first, he declared. Therefore, the doctrine of Photinus is not true. Then we are not only nations but also the dispersed sons of God. Therefore, Christ is the Son of God; and we are sons: but we by adoption, we through Jesus Christ, we as dispersed sons: is Christ also thus a son? Therefore, Jesus is a son by nature, we are sons by adoption. That he is a son by nature, he himself often says (John 11:41): 
 Father, I thank you for hearing me. And (John 12:27): 
 Father, save me from this hour. And again (John 16:28): 
 I came forth from the mouth of the Father. These things are not said as we say them, but according to the Father, God: For God is not a liar, nor impious, calling himself a son, and God the Father who absolutely did not exist: but because of the body, he induced suffering, so that everything might be fulfilled in mystery. And before he was in the body, Christ was (John 12:28): 
 And I have glorified, and I will glorify again: for in mystery, he humbled himself in the flesh. Therefore, before and after this, Jesus was glorified. Because of the mystery, he is also introduced as fearing and asking for certain things (John 12:30): 
 This voice did not come for my sake, but for yours. Similarly, I do these things not for my sake, but for yours.

That the Son of Man himself is Christ, the light in the world is the Son of God (John 12:34, 35): 
 We have heard from the law that the Christ remains forever: and how do you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is the Son of Man? Jesus said to them: 
 The light is among you for a little while longer. And then (John 12:36): 
 While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become sons of light. That he is consubstantial with God (John 14:6, 7): 
 I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. If you had known me, you would have known my Father also: from now on you do know him and have seen him. And again to Philip (John 14:9, 10): 
 Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? And again, these and such things, in which it is clear that the Father is as he is, and the Son is as he is, and therefore there are two. But since the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, they are consubstantial. Therefore, it should not be said that there are two persons, one substance; but two, Father and Son, from one substance; the Father giving from his substance to the Son in this in which he begot the Son, and thus both are consubstantial.

Now I am from the Father. 

And whatever you ask in my name, I will do it, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son. 
            The Paraclete and Christ: 
            If you love me and keep my commandments, I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Paraclete to be with you forever. 
            But who is this other Paraclete? 
            The Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive because it neither sees him nor knows him. 
            They saw the other Paraclete, that is, Christ, in the flesh, but they did not believe in him. 
            The power of Christ is the Paraclete: 
            You know him because he remains with you. 
            Therefore, Christ gave him to you, for he said: He remains in you, and he is in you.

What does this show? 
            If God is spirit, and Jesus is spirit, and the Holy Spirit is spirit, then the three are of one substance; therefore, the three are of the same essence. 
            The Holy Spirit is from Christ, just as Christ is from God, and thus the three are one. 
            I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you. 
            And again he says: 
            On that day, you will know that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you. 
            This is according to the spirit: 
            The Paraclete from the Son: 
            But the Paraclete, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things that I have said to you. 
            It is clear from this that God is in Christ, and Christ is in the Holy Spirit. 
            The first Paraclete is Christ, and the Holy Spirit is the Paraclete. 
            Then Christ sent God: 
            What Christ spoke, the Holy Spirit speaks. 
            But Christ spoke in parables and performed signs:
            Therefore, all things were hidden because he was in the flesh; just as he was inwardly, so too the truth was inwardly in parables and signs. 
            But the Holy Spirit teaches all things: 
            For the Holy Spirit speaks to the spirit of humans; he speaks directly, without any figure:
            And therefore, he will teach you. 
            And what will he speak? 
            Whatever I have said, Christ said. 
            I have said refers to the future. 
            What future? 
            Not the present, but after ascending to the Father. 
            And if this Paraclete comes from God in the name of Christ, he teaches what Jesus says: 
            Therefore, is he Jesus himself, or another Jesus? 
            Or is Jesus in the other Paraclete, that is, the Holy Spirit, as God is in him? 
            In this sequence, the three exist, and the three are one, and of one essence: 
            As Christ says: 
            I go and come to you: 
            Another Paraclete will be given to you by God, who has everything from me, and whatever the Father has, he has given to me. 
            Indeed, the whole mystery is this: 
            The Father working operation, the Son working operation, that is, regeneration: 
            And the Holy Spirit working operation is what regeneration is.

But these things are also said elsewhere: 
            That the Word, that is, Jesus or Christ, is equal to the Father, and also inferior: 
            I go to the Father, for the Father is greater than I. 
            Paul also says: 
            He did not consider equality with God something to be grasped. 
            And it is said: 
            I and the Father are one. 
            And both the Father and the Son work: 
            And he would not have said, the Father is greater than I, unless he was equal: 
            It also follows, if the whole is from the whole, and light from light, and if all that the Father has given to the Son: 
            And all things are substance, power, and dignity, equal to the Father, but the Father is greater: 
            Because he gave everything to the Son, and is the cause of the Son's existence, that he might be in this way. 
            To this, the Father is greater because he is action without activity: 
            More blessed because without trouble, impassible, and the source of all things, resting, perfect in himself, needing nothing: 
            But the Son received to be, and in that which is to act, proceeding from action, coming to perfection, becoming fullness by motion. 
            But because in him, and through him, and by him all things are generated; always full, and always a receptacle, by which reason he is both impassible and passible. 
            Therefore, equal and unequal: 
            Thus, the Father is greater. 
            The Paraclete is from God and from Christ: 
            When the Paraclete comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father. 
            The double power of the Word towards God:

Christ in the flesh: the other in secret, the Holy Spirit. 
    Therefore, when the Word was present, that is, Christ, the Word could not come in secret, that is, the Holy Spirit. 
    (John 16:7): For if I do not go away, the Advocate will not come to you. 
    So, these two are from one another, the Holy Spirit from the Son, just as the Son is rationally from God, and the Holy Spirit is from the Father. 
    All three are one, the Father not silent in silence, but a voice in silence, the Son now a voice; the Advocate the voice of the voice. 
    (John 16:13-14): When the Spirit of truth comes, He will guide you into all the truth: He will not speak on His own authority: Christ is the truth: but whatever He hears, He will speak, and He will declare to you the things that are to come. 
    He will glorify me, for He will take what is mine and declare it to you. 
    Then He adds (John 16:15): All that the Father has is mine. 
    So He says: He will take what is mine, which is one action, that is, Christ is the acting, and the Holy Spirit: and the first thing is to live, and from Him comes understanding: Christ is to live, understanding is the Spirit: therefore the Spirit takes from Christ, Christ Himself from the Father, and thus the Spirit also from the Father. 

Therefore, all things are one, but from the Father. 
    That Christ also proceeded from the Father, that is, that God sent Him, that is, proceeded from God, as He says (John 16:27-28): For I proceeded from God: I proceeded from the Father: 
    It should be known that He also said: and I came forth. 
    But that He put first from God, I proceeded from God: which means, that God sent Him. 
    Believe this first, therefore, because I came forth from God. 
    And from God, and as who? 
    From that God who is my Father: Therefore, I came forth from the Father, and came into the world. 
    The natural order of this speech is this: I proceeded from the Father, came forth from God, and came into the world. 
    But the order of effect and speech from men: because you loved me and believed, that I came forth from God; for this is first in faith. 
    Then I proceeded from the Father, explaining from the higher what was said, from which they also say (John 16:30): We believe that you came forth from the Father. 
    What then did He leave out about God and the Father? 
    For He does not say (John 8:16), I am not alone; because the Father is with me; and it is not to be understood that the Father suffered: for not He, but His human form. 
    What comes in the resurrection of the flesh? (John 17:1-2) Glorify the Son, that the Son may glorify you as you have given him authority over all flesh, to give eternal life to all you have given him. 
    Therefore, not only the man Christ, but God in the man. 
    This is to have life, to believe in the Lord and in His Son (John 17:3): And this is eternal life, that they know you the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent. 
    Who was before the world (John 17:5): And now, Father, glorify me in your own presence with the glory that I had with you before the world existed. 
    That men are from God, but not from God (John 17:6-7): I have manifested your name to the men whom you gave me. 
    From this it is clear that not all were yours, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word: 
    Now they know that everything you have given me is from you. 
    And what a marvel, if men are from God, if also the flesh, which He Himself formed? 
    What then? Is Christ like this? By no means. 
    This whole passage sets forth that men are from God, but not all. 
    Again, and this, that Christ was before the foundation of the world, that the Father has given all things to the Son, if also He gave the name, as He says (John 17:12): I kept them in your name, which you have given me.

Therefore, we have that Christ has the name of the Father, and that He is life, and has the power to give life. 
    That He is life, and the Father is life, as it is said (John 6:58): The living Father sent me. 
    And this is the substance of God and Christ, therefore consubstantial. 
    Then it is said that Christ is light, and God is true light: these are for understanding: is the Holy Spirit something else? 
    No. 
    Then that light, not substance: so therefore consubstantial. 
    And everything that God has, the Son has, therefore consubstantial. 
    But about this later. 
    That He was born (John 18:11): For this I was born, and for this I have come into the world, to reign. 
    That from Christ the Spirit.

Holy (John 20:21): Christ breathed on them and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit." All of this according to the Gospel of John.

Let us also look at a few points according to Matthew; for I pass over similar things.

Even Satan admits that Christ is the Son of God, for he says (Matthew 4:3, 6): "If you are the Son of God."

And this he says three times: But in the second he confessed about the Son of God and tempted, if he were Christ, for he says: "If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down. For it is written: He will command his angels concerning you."

He confesses; the one who says, "concerning you," confesses the Son of God, and thus he confesses him.

Then the demons confess again (Luke 4:41): "Many demons also came out, shouting and saying: 'You are the Son of God.'"

Listen, Arius, listen, Eusebius, and all of you listen, Arians, especially those who say that Christ is from him who is: but according to the serpent’s understanding: because the Father is the one who made Christ: Therefore, saying that the Son is from him who is.

So listen, Satan calls him the Son of God, to whom he promised the kingdom of the world, knowing all things that are in the heavens: for he is from there.

Why then, after the third temptation, did the devil depart, having confessed that he is the Son of God?

What the demons also said, that he is the Son of God (Mark 1:24): "What have you to do with us, Son of God? Have you come?"

Which one should not doubt about Christ (Matthew 11:6): "Blessed is the one who does not take offense at me."

That the Son has everything from the Father (Matthew 11:27): "All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father, nor does anyone know the Father except the Son, and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him."

Why then, does only the Son know the Father, or the Father know the Son? Except that no one has his substance. For all things that are in glory, and in divinity, in power, in their very action and knowledge of the Father, and worship him.

But because to know, this is to know the very nature of God, this is, to have his substance: therefore no one knows God, except the Son having the same substance, and having it from him. Otherwise, no one could see, as it is said (John 1:18): "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has made him known."

What does it mean to be God? For in the bosom, and in the womb of the substance, consubstantial, both, and consisting in substance and divinity, both in each other, and each knows the other.

So, what do you say, Valentine? The first age proceeded, and wanting to see the Father, could not.

To be in the bosom of the Father, and always to be, says John of the Son. Therefore, not only does he see the Father, but he is also always in the Father.

What is a great sin against the Holy Spirit to say (Matthew 12:31, 32): "Every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men. And whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him: but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, either in this age or in the age to come."

First to consider, that the Holy Spirit is of God. For he said (Matthew 12:28): "In the Spirit of God, I cast out demons."

Then about the blasphemy and sin that the Jews committed, as he said, what it is like against the Holy Spirit. First, that blasphemy and sin against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven anyone.

It is a sin, to speak blasphemously with intent. But this is not enough. He said further: even if someone unwillingly speaks any kind of word, which is not a sin, it will not be forgiven him in any age.

So if the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of God, and the Holy Spirit has all things from the Son of God; one substance in three from the substance of the Father, consubstantial: therefore three, that is, together in essence.

If the Father’s substance is Spirit; and the Son, Spirit, and the Holy Spirit, is the Spirit of the Father, in what order is the Holy Spirit placed? For he precedes, if he is the Spirit of the Father; and follows, if he has what he is from the Son.

And again the Son, as much as he is Spirit, is one with the Father, and the Father is in the Son, and all existing in each other: therefore, they are consubstantial, having one and the same substance, and always together consubstantial with a divine affection, having their own subsistent action.

But these things are again sufficient for us who...

They are spoken in the Gospels. Christ, the Son of God and the Savior, says in 
Matthew
 chapter 22, verses 43 and 46:

"How do they say that Christ is the son of David, and David himself says in the book of Psalms, 'The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand?' So David calls him Lord, and how is he his son?"

This shows that Christ existed even before he came in the flesh, that he is the Spirit of God, and that he is God.

Let's also look at the Apostle, for he says about Christ to the Romans:
    "Because Christ is God, on the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God."

Without a doubt, this is about Christ: for he will judge. Because with God, that which does not exist is nothing.
    Paul introduces an example from 
Genesis
 chapter 4, verse 17:
    "Because I have made you the father of many nations before him whom you believed, God, who gives life to the dead, and calls those things which do not exist as though they did."
    Because the Spirit of God is the Spirit of Christ, and the same is the Holy Spirit.
    As written in 
Romans
 chapter 8, verse 9:
    "But you are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he does not belong to him."

The power of the whole mystery is in baptism, its potency in receiving the spirit.
    If this is so, it was said: you are in the spirit: whom the Holy Spirit gave you.
    Who is this Spirit, he added: If indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you.
    Who is this?
    If anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ.
    Therefore, the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Christ are the same.
    In this, it must be understood that the Spirit of Christ is the same as Christ himself.
    It follows, as written in 
Romans
 chapter 8, verse 10:
    "But if Christ is in you."
    Therefore, the Spirit of God is God.
    One substance, because it is the same spirit: but in three,  (homoousion) therefore.
    Hence, not a similar substance, because it is the same spirit: and yet, for this reason, the same passions are not in the Father, because it is one spirit: in two only as passions, because the spirits have already progressed.

But these things will be explained more fully later, as written in 
Romans
 chapter 11, verse 36:
    "Because from him, and through him, and in him are all things. From him: it is said, as from the Father. Through him: as from Christ. In him, as from the Holy Spirit."
    Elsewhere he says: In him, through him, to him.
    That God is Christ, as written in 
Romans
 chapter 9, verse 5:
    "From whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed forever."
    To the Corinthians first, as written in First Corinthians chapter 2, verse 8:
    "If they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of majesty."
    That Christ, just as God, is incomprehensible, or barely comprehensible, but as it is said in First Corinthians chapter 2, verse 9:
    "What no eye has seen, what no ear has heard, and what has not entered into the heart of man, what God has prepared for those who love him."
    Then he says, what he understands, as in First Corinthians chapter 2, verse 11:
    "As the spirit of man understands what is in man, so the Spirit of God understands what is in God."

If he says these things about Christ, it appears that it is not easy to know the generation of the Son.
    For neither does the mind perceive the Son of God, nor can it know the manner of generation.
    If it is about his presence, this too is beyond sight, beyond hearing, beyond mind.
    If, however, as some understand, he says these things about what God has prepared for those who love him: the generation is much more wonderful, and barely comprehensible.
    If these things are without understanding, what can you say from these, from those which are not, that Christ is or is of similar substance?
    Things that are comprehensible and defined.
    But to be  (homoousion) is not only incomprehensible, and it has many contradictions.
    For if  (homoousios) and he is unbegotten: if  (homoousios) how is he another, how is the Father one, the Son another?
    If  (homoousios), how has one suffered, the other not?
    From this come the Patripassians.
    But because by the will of God all things are sought, and those of God, the Spirit who dwells in us, the manner of divine generation will be found, according to which  (homoousios) will be manifested, and those things will be exterminated, as written in First Corinthians chapter 2, verse 12:
    "For we have not received the spirit of the world, but of God."
    That the same spirit is God and Christ and the Holy Spirit, and the same one spirit, as written in First Corinthians chapter 12, verses 3 to 6:
    "Therefore, I make known to you, that no one speaking by the Spirit of God says, 'Jesus is accursed.' And no one can say, 'Jesus is Lord,' except by the Holy Spirit."

It is not possible to declare Jesus as Lord except by the Holy Spirit.
    There are different kinds of gifts, but the same Spirit distributes them.
    There are different kinds of service, but the same Lord.
    There are different kinds of working, but in all of them and in everyone it is the same God at work.

Therefore, if no one says "Anathema Jesus" in the Spirit, it is the Spirit and God and the Holy Spirit.
    About this, it says: And no one can declare Jesus as Lord except by the Holy Spirit.
    Furthermore, it says that the different kinds of gifts come from the Spirit, from God indeed are the graces, but the divisions are from the Spirit.
    For different actions exist from the Holy Spirit, in essence being of the same substance, because the Holy Spirit is like the ministry of the Lord.