Dearest, confessing Christ Jesus, the Lord of all, and venerating the Holy Trinity in unity, be subject to Him alone, fear the immortal God, to whom belongs honor forever and ever.

The Holy Trinity is God, one God indeed, the Father of the living Word, the perfect one who begets the perfect, who neither had a beginning from anyone nor will have an end in anyone. For He is the Father of the only begotten Son, who is Alpha and Omega, who was and is.

The only Son of God chose to be born from one God the Father, who is the wisdom of the Father, through whom all things were created that exist, that flourish, that have flourished, that will be born, that will perish.

The true Son from the true Father, eternal from eternal, immortal from immortal, incorruptible from incorruptible, invisible from invisible, and the one Holy Spirit, in whom remains the perfect life of believers, in whom is holiness and the source of holiness and minister of true edification: through whom God is in all believers and over all, and the Son, who is through all.

Although the Father is from no one, and the Son proceeds from Him, and the Holy Spirit proceeds from both, these are not three gods, but one true God, whose Trinity is to be venerated in persons, and whose unity is to be adored in substance. The perfect Trinity is glorious, with an everlasting kingdom, an eternal and indivisible reign.

For the Son has never been absent from the Father, nor the Spirit from the Son. The Holy Father is equal to the only begotten Son: the Son is equal to the unbegotten Father in the power of divinity: lesser, however, in assuming our humanity. The Holy Spirit is not lesser than the Father and the Son, but is the coeternal comforter of the sorrowful, strength of the weak, sevenfold, eternal, and the subtle giver of grace.

The true Son is the true image of the paternal light, and the true splendor of internal clarity, wanting all men to come to the knowledge of His name, for their salvation and the cleansing of sins, He descended from heaven to earth. He was incarnated, became man, suffered, and then became obedient unto death.

Of whose obedience the Apostle Paul testifies, saying: Though He was a Son of God, He learned obedience from what He suffered: and having been made perfect, He became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey Him, having been designated by God a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.

This same Christ also on the third day rose from the dead, then ascended into heaven, from where He had descended, and led our captivity captive by His marvelous power. Therefore, all who serve the Catholic faith should believe that He will come from there to judge the dead and the living.

The holy and Catholic Church ought to anathematize those who assert that Christ is changeable or mutable.

Therefore, having become man, that is, taking flesh from the holy Virgin Mary, although He became so in the assumption of flesh and blood, He persisted in what He was, naturally and truly as God. Do not say that the flesh has been converted into the nature of deity; nor that the inseparable essence of the Word of God has been changed into the substance of flesh.

For He is inseparable, unchangeable, and unconvertible, and remains the Lord Almighty according to the Scriptures, who is blessed forever and ever. He cannot be greater, He cannot be lesser; He cannot be limited by size, nor comprehended by time. For what is heavenly or divine is known without quantity, and without mass: nor is it contained by any bounds.

Confess the Word of God according to its existence, adore the one Son and our Lord Jesus Christ, not separately, nor place God and man apart, as if joined by the unity of dignity and authority; nor specifically call Christ the Word of God, who is from God, nor similarly another Christ who was born of a woman.

But recognize, venerate, adore only one Christ, the Word of God the Father, with His own flesh. For there is only one Christ, the Son of God, not as if any union is held in the unity of dignity and authority of man and God. Can the nature alone unite the equality of dignity? God forbid.

Peter, the shepherd of the Lord's flock, and John, the chosen virgin, evangelist, and apostle, are of equal dignity to each other.

For this reason, they are called fitting disciples of Christ and witnesses of the truth.

However, each of them is not one.

Therefore, my dearest little children, do not assert that God or the Lord is the Word of Christ, the Father of God.

Lest you again more openly divide the one Christ and Lord into two, and fall into the crime of sacrilege.

Those who make God and the Lord themselves.

Indeed, as we have said, God the Word was united to the flesh according to existence.

God is indeed the ruler of all, the creator of the universe, and the redeemer of humans with His most precious blood.

However, he clearly denies unity, who divides into two Christs Him who is one.

He is an apostate, and truly unhappy, truly to be subjected to perpetual torment.

The devil and his angels rise up in plunder against him, evil spirits meet the reception of his soul.

Innumerable torments are prepared for him, and the evils he has done in his life are set before his eyes.

Therefore, so that you do not end up in these terrible places, confess that Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, is understood as one, to be venerated with His own flesh in one servitude.

Confess with a pure mind, praise with a perfect heart, glorify with a kind mouth, the only-begotten Son of God born from God the Father.

Although He was naturally free from suffering, for us, according to the Scriptures, He suffered in the flesh.

And in the crucified body of His own flesh, He was impassibly referring to the passion.

But by the grace of God, He tasted death for all men, even giving His own body, although He is naturally life and the resurrection of the dead.

For to trample on death with His ineffable power, and admirable virtue, and inestimable magnificence, and to be the firstborn from the dead in His flesh, and the first fruits of those who have fallen asleep, and to make a way for human nature to return to incorruption, by the grace of God, as mentioned, He tasted death for all and rose on the third day, stripping the most savage jaws of hell.

And therefore, although it is said that the resurrection of the dead was made through man, you must understand that the Word made man, which is from God, and through Him the power of death was destroyed.

As the Scripture attests, in the last times, the one Son and Lord will come in the glory of the Father, to judge the world in equity.

It is also necessary for you to believe in the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, His birth, circumcision, apparition, Gospels, passion, death, resurrection, and ascension into heaven.

For this is the correct faith.

But since the virgin conceived God united with flesh according to existence, the virgin gave birth, therefore profess her as the mother of Christ.

Not that the nature of the Word obtained the beginning of existence from the flesh.

For in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

And He is the creator of the ages, the Father of the universe.

Indeed, there are three that give testimony in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit.

These three are one.

Therefore, confess the creator of all as one in substance, a Trinity in persons, so that you may merit to reach the heavenly joys, where the merits of the saints flourish, whose joy and exultation will not cease forever, reigning our Lord Jesus Christ, with the coeternal Father, with the cooperating grace of the Holy Spirit, to whom be praise, dominion, through all ages of ages.

Amen.