
by Taio of Zaragoza
Patrologia Latina Volume 


Book Two. Chapter One: The Incarnation and Birth of Christ.

As Gregory writes in his thirtieth book of Moralia, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Almighty, encompasses all things through the power of his majesty. Yet through the grace of divine economy, he came into the womb of the Virgin. Through his own dispensation he redeems us, embracing all things by his divinity while taking on humanity within the womb.
In that womb he was incarnate, yet not confined. He was within the womb through the substance of weakness, and beyond the world through the power of his majesty.
In his second book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: When Christ came for our redemption, he made certain leaps, so to speak, and it is necessary for us to recognize these leaps of his.
From heaven he came to the womb, from the womb he came to the manger, from the manger he came to the cross, from the cross he came to the tomb, from the tomb he returned to heaven.
Behold, to make us run after him, the Truth made manifest in the flesh made certain leaps for us. As the psalm says, he rejoiced like a giant to run his course, so that we might say to him from our hearts: Draw me after you, we will run to the fragrance of your ointments, as we read in the Song of Songs, chapter one, verse three.
Therefore we must follow with our hearts to where we believe he ascended with his body.
In his thirty-third book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Christ is called the mountain of the Lord, he who deigned to be incarnate among the Israelite people. The incarnate Lord is indeed a mountain upon the peak of mountains, transcending the loftiness of the prophets.
In his second book of Homilies on Ezekiel, Gregory writes: The incarnate Only-Begotten of the Father was not equal to these mountains, that is, the patriarchs, prophets, and all the saints, because from his divinity he transcends the nature, life, and merits of all.
In his first book of Homilies on Ezekiel, Gregory writes: The incarnate Only-Begotten of the Father, by the fact that he became man, was below the angels, as it is written of him: You made him a little lower than the angels, from Psalm eight, verse six.
But rising and ascending into heaven, he presides over all angelic powers, as it is written again of him in the same psalm: You have subjected all things under his feet. And as he himself says in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-eight, verse eighteen: All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
When the Divinity took upon itself the weakness of our flesh, the human race received back the light it had lost. For from that place where God suffers human things, from there humanity is raised up to divine things.
The Mediator between God and humanity, through the incarnation of his humanity, was able to be born, to grow, to die, to rise, to come from place to place.
Because therefore there is no changeability in divinity, and this very changing is passing away, surely this passing is from the flesh, not from divinity.
But through divinity, to stand is always his, because, being present everywhere, he neither comes by movement nor departs by movement.
In his second book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: God the Father Almighty sent his Son into this world, because he ordained him to be incarnate for the redemption of the human race.
He willed him to come into the world for suffering, yet nevertheless he loved the Son whom he sent to suffering.
But the Lord sends his chosen apostles not to the joys of the world, but, just as he himself was sent, to sufferings in the world.
Because therefore the Son is loved by the Father and yet is sent to suffering, so also the disciples are loved by the Lord, who nevertheless are sent to sufferings in the world.
The Almighty Lord, just as he was able to make good things from nothing, so also, when he willed, through the mystery of his incarnation he restored even the good things that had been lost.
In his first book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: Christ Jesus, the Mediator between God and humanity, though he is Lord and Creator of the angels, came into the womb of the Virgin to take upon himself our nature which he had created.
Yet he did not wish to be born in this world through the wealthy; he chose poor parents.
Therefore the lamb which would be offered for him was lacking, and his mother found young doves and a pair of turtledoves for the sacrifice, as we read in the Gospel of Luke, chapter two, verse twenty-four.
Christ Jesus, the human mediator between God and humanity, is not one person in his humanity and another in his divinity.
In his eighteenth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: He was not conceived and brought forth as a mere man, receiving divinity afterward as a reward. Rather, when the angel announced and the Spirit came, immediately the Word was in the womb; immediately within the womb the Word became flesh. And while the unchangeable essence remained, which is coeternal with the Father and with the Holy Spirit in Christ, he took upon himself within the virginal womb what would enable the impassible to suffer, the immortal to die, and the eternal one before the ages to become temporal at the end of the ages.
This was so that through an ineffable mystery, by holy conception and inviolate birth, according to the truth of each nature, the same Virgin might be both handmaid of the Lord and mother.
Thus indeed Elizabeth says to Mary: Why is this granted to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? As we read in the Gospel of Luke, chapter one, verse forty-three. And the Virgin herself, conceiving, says: Behold the handmaid of the Lord; let it be done to me according to your word, as we read in the same chapter, verse thirty-eight.
Although Christ is one thing from the Father and another from the Virgin, he is not one person from the Father and another from the Virgin. Rather, he himself is eternal from the Father, he himself is temporal from his mother.
He himself who made, he himself who was made. He himself is beautiful in form beyond the children of men through divinity, and he himself is the one of whom it was said in the book of Isaiah, chapter fifty-three, verse two: We saw him, and there was no attractiveness, and there is no beauty to him, nor comeliness, through his humanity.
He himself before the ages from the Father without a mother; he himself at the end of the ages from his mother without a father. He himself is the temple of the Creator, he himself is the Creator of the temple. He himself is the author of the work, he himself is the work of the author.
Remaining one person from both natures, neither confused by the union of the natures nor doubled by the distinction of the natures.
In his first book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: When the King of heaven was born, the king of earth was troubled, because earthly power is greatly confounded when heavenly majesty is revealed.
We must ask why it is that when the Redeemer was born, an angel appeared to the shepherds in Judea, yet it was not an angel but a star that led the Magi from the East to worship him.
For indeed, to the Jews as those using reason, a rational being, that is an angel, ought to preach. But the Gentiles, because they did not know how to use reason, are led to know the Lord not by voice but by signs, since to the former prophecies were given as to the faithful, and to the latter signs as to the unfaithful, as we read in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter fourteen, verse twenty-two.
We who are held in the bosom of holy Church, when the Lord is born let us offer gold, that we may confess that he reigns everywhere. Let us offer frankincense, that we may believe that he who appeared in time existed as God before all times. Let us offer myrrh, that we may believe that he whom we believe impassible in his divinity was also mortal in our flesh.
We offer gold to the newborn King of heaven if we shine in his sight with the brightness of heavenly wisdom. We offer frankincense if we kindle the thoughts of the flesh through holy practices of prayer on the altar of the heart, so that we may be able to give off something sweet to God through heavenly desire. We offer myrrh if we mortify the vices of the flesh through abstinence.

Chapter Two: The Preaching Ministry of Christ.

In his first book of Homilies on Ezekiel, Gregory writes: If Almighty God were silent about his mighty works, no one would know him, no one would love him.
Therefore he announces his mighty works, not that he himself might profit from his own praises, but that those who come to know him through his praise might arrive at the eternal inheritance.
In his eighteenth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: For this reason God declares his praises, that hearing them we may be able to know him, knowing him to love him, loving him to follow him, following him to attain him, and attaining him to enjoy the vision of him.
The prophet says: The Lord has announced the power of his works to his people, that he may give them the inheritance of the nations, as we read in Psalm one hundred ten, verse six.
As if he were saying openly: For this reason he makes known the strength of his working, that whoever hears it may be enriched with gifts.
In his first book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: The prophet David says: I have announced and spoken, they are multiplied beyond number, as we read in Psalm thirty-nine, verse six.
When the Lord announces, the faithful are multiplied beyond number, because sometimes even those come to faith who will not reach the number of the elect.
For here they are mingled with the faithful through confession, but because of their reprobate life they do not deserve to be numbered there in the lot of the faithful.
In his twenty-fifth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: The prophet, seeing so many believe outwardly when the Lord calls and announces, so many indeed that they certainly exceed the number and total of the elect, says: They are multiplied beyond number, as we read in Psalm thirty-nine, verse six.
As if he were saying: With many entering the Church, even those come to faith outwardly who are excluded from the number of the heavenly kingdom, because by their sheer multiplicity they exceed the total of the elect.

Chapter Three: The Calling of the Apostles.

In his thirty-fifth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: The holy apostles, when called by Christ and about to be filled with the grace of the sevenfold Spirit, were chosen as twelve.
For they were being sent to make known the Trinity, who is God, in the four parts of the world. Therefore twelve were chosen, so that even from the logic of the number itself it might become clear that through the four lowest regions they would preach the three highest realities.
In his first book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: At the voice of a single command, Peter and Andrew, leaving their nets, followed the Redeemer. They had not yet seen him perform any miracles. They had heard nothing from him about the reward of eternal recompense. And yet at one precept of the Lord they forgot what they seemed to possess.
Our merchants, the holy apostles, purchased the perpetual life of the angels by giving their nets and boat. For indeed the kingdom of God has no fixed price, but it is nevertheless worth as much as you have.
The holy apostles, called through the Mediator between God and humanity, strove in this age to love nothing, to desire nothing.
Isaiah, looking upon them well, says: Who are these who fly like clouds, and like doves to their windows? As we read in the book of Isaiah, chapter sixty, verse eight.
For he saw them despise earthly things, draw near to heavenly things in their minds, rain down in words, flash with miracles. And those whom both holy preaching and sublime life had lifted from earthly contaminations, these he calls both flying doves and clouds together.
The elect are therefore like doves at their windows, who desire nothing in this world, who look upon all things simply, and are not drawn by the desire for plunder in the things they see.
For it is written: By the word of the Lord the heavens were established, and by the spirit of his mouth all their power, as we read in Psalm thirty-two, verse six.
In his second book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: For the Word of the Lord is the Son of the Father. Therefore the power of the heavens was received from the Spirit, because the apostles would not presume to stand against the powers of this world unless the strength of the Holy Spirit had fortified them.

Chapter Four: Jewish Unbelief and Violence Toward Christ.

In his thirty-fifth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Isaac with his clouded eyes signifies the Jews blinded by the treachery of their hearts, whose earlier knowledge and later ignorance are well and briefly indicated in the book of Genesis, chapter twenty-seven.
For while he was blessing Jacob, he saw what would happen to him in the future, yet did not know who was present assisting him.
The people of Israel received the mysteries of prophecy, yet nevertheless held blind eyes in contemplation, because they did not see him present concerning whom they foresaw so much in the future.
For they could in no way perceive the one placed before them, whose powerful coming they announced long before.
In his first book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: In all the signs that were shown when the Lord was born or dying, we must consider how great was the hardness in the hearts of certain Jews, which recognized him neither through the gift of prophecy nor through miracles.
All the elements testified that their creator had come. For to speak of them in human terms: the heavens knew him to be God, because they immediately sent forth a star. The sea knew him, because it presented itself as walkable under his feet. The earth knew him, because it trembled when he was dying. The sun knew him, because it hid the rays of its light. The rocks and walls knew him, because they were split at the time of his death. Hell acknowledged him, because it gave back the dead whom it had been holding.
And yet the hearts of unbelieving Jews still do not at all recognize as God the one whom all insensible elements perceived as Lord. Harder than rocks, they refuse to be split open to repentance, and they refuse to confess the one whom the elements, as we have said, proclaimed as God either by signs or by being split.
Some of the Jews, to the increase of their condemnation, foreknew long before that he would be born, this one whom they despise once born. And they knew not only that he would be born, but also where he would be born.
For when questioned by Herod, they specify the place of his birth, which they had learned from the authority of Scripture.
And they bring forward testimony that Bethlehem is shown to be honored by the birth of a new Leader, so that their very knowledge might become for them a testimony of damnation and for us an aid to belief.
Isaac well represented the Jewish people when he blessed his son Jacob, because with clouded eyes and prophesying, he did not see in the present the son for whom he foresaw so much in the future. For indeed the Jewish people, full of the spirit of prophecy yet blind, did not recognize when present the one about whom they predicted much in the future.
In his twenty-ninth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: The Jews feared that if they did not kill the Lord, they would lose both their place and their nation. But why did these things happen to these wretched people? Because knowledge of eternity was lacking in their hearts, and doctrine refreshed them with no food of internal vitality.
In his eighteenth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: The Synagogue, which brought forth the commandments of God through the Law, persecuting the nascent Church, consumed itself in the fire of envy.
Was it not burning with the torches of its own jealousy when, seeing the signs of our Redeemer, it said through some of its members: What are we doing, because this man performs many signs? As we read in the Gospel of John, chapter eleven, verse forty-seven.
Or indeed: You see that we are accomplishing nothing. Behold, the whole world is going after him.
The Jews saw that by which they ought to have been converted, and from that very thing they became more perverse. They sought to extinguish the one whom they saw bringing the dead to life. They held the Law in their mouths, but they persecuted the author of the Law.
In his seventeenth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Our Redeemer, before he allowed himself to be seized by the Jews, sought out his persecutors, saying: Whom do you seek? To whom they immediately responded: Jesus of Nazareth, as we read in the Gospel of John, chapter eighteen, verse four.
When he suddenly said to them: I am he, he uttered only the voice of a most gentle response, and immediately laid his armed persecutors flat on the ground.
What therefore will he do when he comes to judge, he who struck down his enemies with one word even when he came to be judged? What is that judgment which the immortal one will exercise, who could not be endured in one word when about to die? Or who will tolerate his anger, whose very gentleness could not be tolerated?
In his second book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Concerning Peter who was about to deny, it is mentioned beforehand: Because it was cold, and standing at the fire he was warming himself, as we read in the Gospel of John, chapter eighteen, verse eighteen.
Already Peter had grown cold within from the warmth of charity, and toward the love of the present age, as if toward the fires of persecutors, he was warming himself with burning desire.
In his preface to the fourth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: The mountains of Gilboa signify the proud hearts of the Jews, who, while flowing down into the desires of this world, involved themselves in the death of Christ, that is, the Anointed One.
And because the anointed King dies bodily among them, they themselves are dried up from all dew of grace. The proud minds of the Hebrews do not bear first fruits, because at the Redeemer's coming, remaining for the most part in treachery, they refused to follow the beginnings of faith.
In his twenty-seventh book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Were not the hearts of the persecuting Jews the cavern of the devil? In their counsels he lay hidden for a long time, but suddenly burst forth in the voices of those shouting: Crucify him, crucify him, as we read in the Gospel of John, chapter nineteen, verse six.
And because by tempting he could not reach the tearing apart of the mind, he panted for the death of the flesh in our Redeemer.

Chapter Five: The Suffering and Death of Jesus Christ.

In his twelfth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: As the Lord approached his passion, he took upon himself the voice of those weakening in themselves, and he took up their fear in order to remove it, saying: My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me, as we read in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-six, verse thirty-nine.
And again, showing the force of strength through obedience, he says: Nevertheless, not as I will, but as you will.
So that when something is imminent which we do not wish to happen, we may in weakness ask that it not happen, in order that through strength we may be prepared for the will of our Creator to be done even against our will.
In his second book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Our Redeemer, when questioned at the time of his passion, testified that he is the Son of God. Hence those seeking to condemn him say: What further need do we have of witnesses? Behold, we ourselves have heard his blasphemy, as we read in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-six, verse sixty-five.
But he said nothing foolishly against God, because speaking the truth, he brought upon himself from unbelievers even by dying what the Redeemer shortly afterward showed to all by rising.
In his thirty-third book of Moralia, Gregory writes: The devil had confessed the Son of God, as we read in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter eight, verse twenty-nine, but nevertheless he believed that a mere man was dying, and he stirred up the souls of persecuting Jews to his death.
But at the very time of the betrayal he is understood to have realized too late that he would be punished by that death. Therefore he also terrified Pilate's wife with dreams, so that her husband might cease from the persecution of the Just One.
But what had been arranged by internal dispensation could not be opposed by any stratagem. It was very fitting that the death of the just one dying unjustly should release the death of sinners dying justly.
Because the devil was ignorant of this until the time of his passion, deceived like a bird, he endured the snare of his divinity while he bit at the bait of his humanity.
In his second book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: If at the time of his passion Christ had descended from the cross, certainly yielding to those mocking him, he would not have demonstrated to us the virtue of patience.
But he waited a little while, endured reproaches, sustained mockeries, preserved patience, postponed wonder. And he who refused to descend from the cross, as we read in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-seven, verse forty-two, rose from the tomb.
Therefore it is more to rise from the tomb than to descend from the cross. It was more to destroy death by rising than to preserve life by descending.
When the Jews saw Christ in no way descending from the cross at their taunts, they believed they had conquered him. They rejoiced that they had apparently extinguished his name.
But behold, his name grew throughout the world from that death by which this unbelieving crowd believed they had extinguished it. And those who rejoiced that he was killed grieve that he died, because they recognize that he came to his glory through punishment.
In his fourteenth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: When the hour of the cross had come, a heavy fear from the persecution of the Jews invaded the Lord's disciples. They fled individually, but women stood by, concerning whom blessed Job rightly says figuratively: And when the flesh was consumed, only the lips remained around my teeth, as we read in the book of Job, chapter nineteen, verse twenty.
Therefore, as if when the flesh was consumed, the mouth of the Lord clung to his skin, because his strength, at the time of the passion when the disciples were fleeing, found women near him.
Indeed Peter stood for some time during the Lord's passion, but afterward, terrified, he denied him, as we read in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-six, verse seventy. John also stood, to whom at the very time of the cross it was said: Behold your mother, as we read in the Gospel of John, chapter nineteen, verse twenty-seven. But he could not persevere, because it is also written of him that a certain young man followed him clothed in a linen cloth over his naked body, and they seized him. But he, throwing off the linen cloth, fled naked from them, as we read in the Gospel of Mark, chapter fourteen, verse fifty-one.
As Gregory writes in his first book of Homilies on Ezekiel: Though he afterward returned to the hour of the cross to hear the words of his Redeemer, nevertheless he first fled in terror.
But the women are remembered not only as not having feared nor fled, but even as having stood by all the way to the tomb.
Concerning the Lord Jesus Christ before his passion it is written: Behold, angels came and ministered to him, as we read in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter four, verse eleven. But nevertheless, as he drew near to the passion, that the weakness of his humanity might be shown, it is written again of him: An angel appeared to him from heaven strengthening him, as we read in the Gospel of Luke, chapter twenty-two, verse forty-three.
Therefore as evidence of both natures it is described that angels minister to him and that an angel strengthens him. One person in both natures, for he who existed as God before the ages became man at the end of the ages.
Before his passion, angels minister to him and an angel strengthens him. But after his passion and resurrection, angels can minister to him, but can no longer strengthen him.
In his eighteenth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Among these things it is pleasing to direct the eyes of the mind to that thief who ascended from the jaws of the devil to the cross, from the cross to paradise.
Let us contemplate what sort of person came to the gibbet, and what sort departed from the gibbet. He came guilty of fraternal blood, he came bloodstained, but he was changed on the cross by internal grace.
And he who brought death to his brother proclaimed the life of the dying Lord, saying: Remember me, Lord, when you come into your kingdom, as we read in the Gospel of Luke, chapter twenty-three, verse forty-two.
Of this thief on the cross, nails bound his hands and feet, and nothing remained free from punishment except his heart and tongue. At God's inspiration he offered all that he found free in himself, so that according to what is written, he believed with the heart unto righteousness and confessed with the mouth unto salvation, as we read in Paul's letter to the Romans, chapter ten, verse ten.
The thief confessed as God the one whom he saw dying with him in human weakness, when the apostles were denying the one whom they had seen performing miracles by divine power.
But those who assert that a person is saved by his own powers suspect that this same confession of the man comes from the man's own strength. If this were so, the Psalmist would not say in praise of God: Confession and magnificence are his work, as we read in Psalm one hundred ten, verse three.
Therefore we receive the ability to confess rightly from the one from whom great works are also given to us to perform.
In his twenty-ninth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: While Jesus sought the straits of death, he spread his faith among the nations, and extended the holy Church to the innumerable hearts of believers, to whom it is said through the prophet: Enlarge the place of your tent, and stretch out the skins of your tabernacles, do not spare, make your cords long and strengthen your stakes. For you will penetrate to the right and to the left, and your seed will inherit the nations, as we read in the book of Isaiah, chapter fifty-four, verse two.
This breadth of the earth would surely not happen unless he first despised by dying the life we know, and showed by rising the life we do not know.
Our Redeemer in his death opened the eyes of our mind, and showed what the life would be that follows. Therefore keeping this order in the Gospel, he says to his disciples: Thus it was necessary for Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead on the third day, and for repentance and forgiveness of sins to be preached in his name through all nations, as we read in the Gospel of Luke, chapter twenty-four, verse forty-six.
Our Redeemer, to redeem us from death, came to death, and endured the weakness of our flesh and its punishments in his own body. Before he came to the gibbet of the cross, he endured being seized, spat upon, mocked, and struck with blows. Behold to what great reproaches he consented to come for our sake!
In his third book of Moralia, Gregory writes: When the Lord handed himself over to the hands of Satan's members for our redemption, what else did he do but allow Satan's own hands to rage against him, so that from where he himself fell externally, from there he might free us both externally and internally?
If Satan's hand is understood as his power, our Redeemer endured his hand according to the flesh, whose power against his body he tolerated even to spittle, blows, scourges, cross, and lance.
Hence coming to his passion he says to Pilate, regarding his body: You would have no power over me unless it had been given to you from above, as we read in the Gospel of John, chapter nineteen, verse eleven.
But nevertheless this power, which he had given externally against himself, he compelled internally to serve his own benefits. For Pilate, or Satan who had been Pilate's head, was held under the power of the one over whom he had received power.
Because the superior one, our Redeemer himself, had arranged what he was enduring below as it befell him from his persecutor, so that though it arose from the evil mind of unbelievers, nevertheless even that very cruelty might serve the benefit of all the elect.
Therefore he mercifully arranged internally what he wickedly allowed himself to suffer externally.
In his first book of Homilies on the Gospels, Gregory writes: Our Redeemer, foreseeing that the minds of his disciples would be troubled by his passion, predicted to them long before both the punishment of that same passion and the glory of his resurrection, so that when they saw him dying, as it was predicted, they would not doubt that he would also rise.

Chapter Six: The Single Death of Christ and Our Double Death.

In his fourth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: The Mediator between God and humanity came before the eyes of God to destroy the sins of humanity, he who would take upon himself for us only the death of the flesh, and would destroy the true death of transgressors through the shadow of his own death.
Our Redeemer descended to us with merciful compassion, we who were held in the death of spirit and flesh. He brought down to us his one death, and released our two deaths which he found.
If our Redeemer had taken upon himself both deaths, he would have freed us from neither. But he mercifully accepted one, and justly condemned both.
He applied his single death to our double death, and by dying he conquered our double death.
Christ Jesus, the human mediator between God and humanity, not undeservedly lay in the tomb one day and two nights, because he joined the light of his single death to the darkness of our double death.
Therefore he who accepted only the death of the flesh for us endured the shadow of death, and hid from God's eyes the guilt which we committed.

Chapter Seven: The Resurrection of Christ.

In his thirty-first book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Christ Jesus, the human mediator between God and humanity, came to restore all things, so that, with the human race redeemed, he might repair those angelic losses and perhaps heap up the measure of the heavenly homeland more abundantly.
Concerning this restoration it is said of the Father: He purposed in him, in the dispensation of the fullness of times, to restore all things in Christ, both those in the heavens and those on earth in him, as we read in Paul's letter to the Ephesians, chapter one, verses nine and ten.
For in him are restored the things that are on earth, while sinners are converted to righteousness. In him are restored the things that are in heaven, while humbled humans return to that place from which apostate angels fell through pride.
In his first book of Homilies on Ezekiel, Gregory writes: The Only-Begotten of the Father, by the fact that he became man, was below the angels, as it is written of him: You made him a little lower than the angels, as we read in Psalm eight, verse six. But rising and ascending into heaven, he presides over all angelic powers, as it is written again of him in the same place: You have subjected all things under his feet, verse seven. And as he himself says: All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me, as we read in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-eight, verse eighteen.
In his fourteenth book of Moralia, Gregory writes: Our Redeemer took upon himself death, lest we should fear to die. He showed forth resurrection, that we might have confidence that we can rise. Therefore he willed that same death to be no more than three days, lest if resurrection were delayed in him, it should be utterly despaired of in us.

Chapter 12: The Early Formation of the Church

Almighty God never abandons his Church without worthy leaders. When he calls the strong to their reward, he strengthens the weak in their place to carry on the struggle. Even as he receives those departed into glory, he supplies to these remaining the strengths and virtues he will later reward. Those who later become leaders are raised up in the strength of the ancient Fathers. Just as when old trees are cut down, tender shoots spring up to replace their strength. The Psalmist rightly says: In place of your fathers, sons have been born to you; you will make them princes over all the earth, as stated in the forty-fourth Psalm, verse seventeen.
God will be recognized in her stages of growth when he receives her, as the forty-seventh Psalm, verse four, tells us. When the Lord receives the holy Church, he is recognized in her stages of ascent, because his glory is made known through her growth. The more the holy Church advances in her ascent, the more God becomes known to humanity through her virtues.
Blessed Job speaks of these stages, saying: Through each of my steps I will proclaim him, from the book of Job, chapter thirty-one, verse thirty-seven. Almighty God is recognized in the Church's stages of growth because in each of her virtues and miracles, how much he is to be feared and loved is demonstrated to all. He receives her especially when she returns to him from her sins through repentance.
The daughter of kings is the holy Church, who was born in good works through the preaching of spiritual princes. She has her glory within, as it is written: All the glory of this daughter of kings is within, from the forty-fourth Psalm, verse fourteen. For what she does daily, she does not do for the boasting of outward display. If she sought glory externally, she would not possess within the beauty that the King desires.
Because the holy Church has kept her outward conduct blameless from her beginnings until now, the Psalmist rightly says of her: Clothed around with golden fringes in variety, from the forty-fourth Psalm, verse fourteen. Thus she is beautiful inwardly to herself and outwardly to others, advancing herself through inner glory while instructing others through outward examples of her works.
Only the Church of the elect was to be joined to the only-begotten Son of God the Father, whom the Only-Begotten himself, through predestination and presence, never considered foreign. The holy Church has received as many kisses from his mouth as she has learned commandments from our Redeemer's preaching, as it is written: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, from the Song of Songs, chapter one, verse one. It is as if she openly declares: Long ago he extended kisses to me through the prophecies of the prophets, as through certain lips, but now may the very sweetness of the presence of the only-begotten Son, my Redeemer, touch me.
All the churches that make up the one catholic Church are called young maidens, not aged through guilt but renewed through grace. They are not barren through old age, but in the maturity of mind suited for spiritual fruitfulness.
The holy Church showed that she knew the law of nature from the earlier people, and she received the words of preaching in the broad embrace of charity. Hearing the words of life and coming to the way of true faith, the holy Church strove not to be wiser than one ought to be, but to exercise wisdom with sobriety.
Yet she gave earthly wages to preachers. When Paul the apostle received these as though they were nothing, he said: If we have sown spiritual things among you, is it too much if we reap material benefits from you? This is from Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter nine, verse eleven.
The holy Church, who first received through faith, obedience, and action, growing afterward also becomes strong in spiritual gifts, so that filled with the spirit of prophecy and the grace of miracles, she might become rich with multiplied gifts. When the Church came to him, our only-begotten Lord and Redeemer remained in the minds of those from Judea who were held not by the coldness of sluggishness but by the fervor of charity. From that people came Anna the prophetess, from that people came Simeon, who received the Lord in his arms.
The holy Church satisfied the desire of her preachers through the strength of her faith. Because she confessed the God she had heard about, she offered her preacher refreshing water, as it were, and cooled his soul. Rebecca properly signified this when she placed the water jar from her shoulder into her arms and gave water to Abraham's servant to drink. For the holy Church did not remain empty in what she believed. She immediately strove to preach what she had heard, and through teaching she brought forth many preachers from herself.
What does it mean that Rebecca is led to Isaac on the back of a camel? Through Rebecca the Church is signified, and by the camel over which she presides is designated the gentile people, crooked in morals and burdened with the worship of idols. For they who found gods for themselves to worship had, as from themselves, caused a burden to grow on their backs that they must carry. The more subtly the holy Church recognizes her Redeemer, the more she abandons the enticements of carnal life through the pursuit of humility and contradicts within herself the crookedness of vice. Rebecca signifies this when, having seen Isaac, she descends from the camel. For having known the Lord, the gentiles abandoned their vices and sought the depths of humility from the heights of pride.
Following Christ, the holy Church covers over the vices of earthly desire through repentance, which Rachel rightly signified when she covered her father Laban's idols by sitting on them. Of this covering of vices the prophet says: Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered, from the thirty-first Psalm, verse one. Therefore Rachel signified us, who press down idols by sitting on them, if we condemn the sins of avarice through repentance.
At the beginning of the newborn Church, signs and miracles were necessary. For the Church to grow in faith, she had to be nourished by miracles. On the priest's robe, according to the divine command, pomegranates are joined with bells. What else does the pomegranate signify but the unity of faith? Just as in a pomegranate one rind protects many seeds within, so the unity of faith covers the innumerable peoples of the holy Church, whom diversity of merits holds within.

Chapter 13: The Grace of Baptism

Whoever is not loosed by the water of rebirth remains bound by the guilt of the first bond. What the water of baptism accomplishes among us was done among the ancients either by faith alone for infants, or by the power of sacrifice for adults, or by the mystery of circumcision for those descended from Abraham's line.
Everyone is conceived with the sin of the first parent, as the prophet testifies, saying: Behold, I was conceived in iniquities, from the fiftieth Psalm, verse seven. And because one whom the water of salvation does not wash away does not lose the penalties of original sin, the Truth himself openly declares: Unless someone is reborn of water and the Holy Spirit, he will not have eternal life, from the Gospel of John, chapter three, verse five.
We are truly faithful when we fulfill by our works what we promise with our words. On the day of baptism we promise to renounce all the works of the ancient enemy and all his pomps. Therefore let each of you turn the eyes of your mind to consideration of yourself, and if you keep after baptism what you promised before baptism, rejoice with certainty that you are faithful.
We inherit original sin from our parents, and unless we are released through the grace of baptism, we also bear the sins of our parents, because we are still one with them. It is written in the book of Exodus: You visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, from the book of Exodus, chapter thirty-four, verse seven. Therefore the Lord visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children when the soul of the offspring is polluted by original sin because of the parent's fault. But again he does not visit the iniquity of the parents upon the children, because when we are freed from original sin through baptism, we no longer bear our parents' sins but only those we ourselves have committed.

Chapter 14: The Holy Communion

Each sinner, receiving the price of his redemption, confesses and praises God, and makes this known to his neighbors with whatever words he can, as blessed Job says in the figure of our Redeemer: Earth, do not cover my blood, from the book of Job, chapter sixteen, verse nineteen. The earth did not cover the blood of Christ, because the holy Church has preached the mystery of her redemption in all parts of the world.
For the very blood of redemption that is received is the cry of our Redeemer. Paul the apostle says: And to the sprinkling of Christ's blood that speaks better than Abel, from the letter to the Hebrews, chapter twelve, verse twenty-four. Of Abel's blood it had been said: The voice of your brother's blood cries to me from the earth, from the book of Genesis, chapter four, verse ten. But the blood of Jesus speaks better than Abel, because Abel's blood sought the death of his fratricide brother, but the Lord's blood obtained life for his persecutors.
That the sacrament of the Lord's passion may not be idle in us, we must imitate what we receive and preach to others what we venerate. Therefore blessed Job again says: Let my cry find no place to hide in you. For his cry finds a hiding place in us if the tongue is silent about what the mind believes. But lest his cry be hidden in us, it remains that each according to his ability make known to his neighbors the mystery of his vivification.
Who the blood of Christ is we have learned not by hearing but by drinking. This blood is placed on both doorposts, as the book of Exodus, chapter twelve, verse seven tells us, when it is drunk not only by the mouth of the body but also by the mouth of the heart. On both doorposts the blood of the lamb is placed when the sacrament of Christ's passion is received with the mouth for redemption and also pondered with attentive mind for imitation. We eat the flesh of the lamb as if in the night when we now receive the Lord's body in the sacrament, when we do not yet see one another's consciences.
For it profits nothing to receive the body and blood of Christ Jesus with the mouth while contradicting him with perverse behavior. Those who live wickedly in the Church and do not cease to receive communion, thinking they are cleansed by such communion, should learn that they gain nothing from cleansing, with the Prophet saying to them: What has my beloved done in my house when she has committed many crimes? Will holy flesh take away your wickedness from you? This is from the book of Jeremiah, chapter eleven, verse fifteen.
And the Apostle says: Let a person examine himself, and thus let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup, for whoever receives it unworthily eats and drinks judgment upon himself. This is from Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter eleven, verse twenty-eight.

Chapter 15: The Width, Length, Height, and Depth of God

He has width, because almighty God extends his love even to gathering in persecutors. He has length, because he leads us to our heavenly homeland by bearing with us patiently. He has height, because he transcends even the understanding of those who will be received into the heavenly assembly. He has depth, because to the condemned below he exercises the judgment of his severity incomprehensibly.
God exercises four qualities toward each of us placed in this life: both width by loving, and length by tolerating, and height by surpassing not only our understanding but also our desires, and he displays his depth by strictly judging the hidden and illicit movements of our thoughts.
No one recognizes how unsearchable is the height and depth of almighty God except one who has either advanced to the highest things through contemplation or, resisting hidden movements, has begun to be troubled by the importunity of temptations.
Although nothing can be said worthily of almighty God according to position, quality, condition, or motion, yet there exists in him in some manner width, length, height, and depth. In almighty God there is the width of charity, by which he both corrects us from error and keeps us in truth. There is in him also length, which patiently bears with us as evil until he restores us, amended, to our future homeland. There is in him also height, through which he surpasses all understanding by the immensity of his knowledge. There is in him also depth, by which, disposing the damned below according to equity, he preordains them.

Chapter 16: The Call of the Gentiles to the Church

The gentiles, called to faith and desiring to kiss the footsteps of their Redeemer, never cease from the intention of good work, because they sigh in continuous love for him. Hence with the voice of the bride concerning this same Redeemer of hers, the Song of Songs begins thus: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, from the Song of Songs, chapter one, verse one. She rightly desires the kiss of her Creator, who prepares herself to serve him through love.
Rescuing the gentiles, the Lord overcame the yoke of their burden when by his coming he freed them from that demonic tyranny. He overcame the rod of their shoulder, as the book of Isaiah, chapter nine, verse four states, when he restrained from redeemed humanity the blow that gravely oppressed them through perverse work. He overcame the scepter of their oppressor when he destroyed from the hearts of the faithful the kingdom of that same devil, who used to exact the owed tributes of punishments for the pestilential perpetration of vices.
For it is written: The ox knows its owner, and the donkey its master's manger, from the book of Isaiah, chapter one, verse three. By the ox are designated the workers of Judea, but by the donkey the gentile peoples. For who was the ox but the Jewish people, whose neck the yoke of the Law wore down? And who was the donkey but the gentiles, whom any deceiver found like a dumb animal resisting by no reason and subdued to whatever error he wished? Therefore the ox knew its owner and the donkey its master's manger, because both the Hebrew people found the God whom they worshiped but did not know, and the gentiles received the food of the law which they did not have.
After the Mediator's coming, the catholic Church has simple donkeys, because the called peoples of the gentiles, while desiring to arrive at rest, willingly bear all the burdens of the commandments. Therefore Jacob, addressing his sons, strove to signify this prophetically, saying that the gentile people would seek this rest: Issachar is a strong donkey lying down between the boundaries; he saw that rest was good and that the land was excellent, and he bent his shoulder to carry, from the book of Genesis, chapter forty-two, verses fourteen and fifteen.
The prophet Isaiah cries out saying: The Lord sent a word to Jacob, and it fell upon Israel, from the book of Isaiah, chapter nine, verse eight. Jacob indeed means Supplanter, while Israel means One Who Sees God. And what is designated by Jacob but the Jewish people, what by Israel but the gentile people? Because the one whom Jacob strove to supplant through death of the flesh, this one the gentiles surely saw as God through the eyes of faith. Therefore the word sent to Jacob fell upon Israel, because the one whom the Jewish people rejected when he came to them, the gentile people suddenly found by confessing him.
When the prophet recognized that the Jewish people were perishing from faith, and foresaw the holy apostles rising in the Church, through whom many from the gentiles were strengthened in the fortitude of faith and life, he spoke in great consolation, saying: Bricks have fallen, but we will build with squared stones, from the book of Isaiah, chapter nine, verse ten. Seeing apostles, martyrs, and teachers rising in the holy Church, he grieved less over the fall of bricks, that is, over the destruction of the Jews, because he beheld the building of almighty God, that is, the holy Church, being built with squared stones.
Hence the same prophet says: And the bridle of error that was in the jaws of the peoples will be a song for you, from the book of Isaiah, chapter thirty, verses twenty-eight and twenty-nine. The bridle of error had bound the jaws of the peoples when the gentiles, bound by the error of idols, did not know how to give praise of confession to the true God. But this very bridle of error has now been turned into a song for us, when we joyfully sing in psalms and chant: All the gods of the gentiles are demons, but the Lord made the heavens, from the ninety-fifth Psalm, verse five. And again: The idols of the gentiles are silver and gold, the works of human hands. They have mouths and will not speak, they have eyes and will not see, from the one hundred thirteenth Psalm, verse four.
When we sing these things to the almighty Lord in psalms, we make the very bridle of our error, which had bound our mouths from praising God, into a song for the true Lord. But it is well added: Like the night of a sanctified solemnity, from the book of Isaiah, chapter thirty, verse twenty-nine, because while we render praise of confession to God, we rejoice in sanctified solemnity.
It is written: In the lairs where dragons formerly dwelt, there will arise the greenness of reed and rush, from the book of Isaiah, chapter thirty-five, verse seven. For in the lairs of dragons the greenness of reed and rush arises, because in those peoples whom the malice of the ancient enemy possessed, both the knowledge of teachers and the obedience of hearers are heaped up.
There will arise in her the greenness of reed and rush, that is, in the holy Church arise writers and hearers, so that by the reed are understood writers, but by the rush should be understood hearers. Reed and rush are accustomed to grow through the moisture of water. Both flourish from one and the same water. And indeed the reed is taken up for writing, but with the rush nothing can be written. What should we understand in rush and reed except that there is one doctrine of truth that irrigates many hearers?
But when irrigated, some advance so far in the word of God that they even become writers, namely like reeds; others truly hear the word of life and retain the greenness of good hope and right works, but nevertheless cannot advance to writing. Who are these in the water of faith except certain, so to speak, rushes? Who indeed flourish by growing green, but can in no way express letters.
In faith in the Mediator between God and humanity, the man Christ Jesus, the gentiles received the fullness of grace, and Judea through the error of faithlessness lost that by which she had been puffed up. The Lord placed the desert into pools of water, as the book of Isaiah, chapter forty-one, verse eighteen states, because to the gentiles, who previously through dryness of mind bore no fruits of good works, he gave the streams of holy preaching. And she herself, to whom previously because of the harshness of her dryness the way was not open to preachers, afterward poured forth streams of doctrine.
It is written: I will say to the north, Give up, and to the south, Do not withhold, from the book of Isaiah, chapter forty-three, verse six. Just as by the north the gentiles are signified, so by the south is Judea signified. She as it were grew warm with the midday sun, because when the Redeemer came in flesh she was the first to receive the fervor of faith. Therefore to the north it is said, Give up, when the gentiles are commanded to offer to God the gifts of their faith. But the south is ordered not to withhold, because it is commanded to the Hebrews standing in faith that they not contemptuously reject the life of the gentiles.
Just as the whole Church generally is called the garment of Christ, so the garment of the Church consists of individual souls, which, converted from error, surround that same Church by believing and faithfully clinging to her. The holy Church is now clothed with as many garments, as it were, as she is adorned with veneration by the faithful. To the holy Church, when the gentiles have been shown to her, it is said by the Lord through the prophet: As I live, you will surely clothe yourself with all these as with an ornament, from the book of Isaiah, chapter forty-five, verse eighteen.
For if the holy Church were not the garment of Christ, Paul the apostle certainly would not have said: That he might present to himself a glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle, from Paul's letter to the Ephesians, chapter five, verse twenty-seven, that is, neither spot through sin nor wrinkle through duplicity. Because she is clean through righteousness and stretched out through simple intention, therefore what has been washed lest it have a spot and stretched lest it have a wrinkle is certainly a garment.
The holy Church extends to the right in such a great multitude of peoples when she receives some who are to be justified. She also expands to the left when she admits to herself some who will remain in iniquity. Because of this multitude that lies outside the number of the elect, the Lord says in the Gospel: Many are called, but few are chosen, from the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty, verse sixteen.
When the Jews fell from faith, the hearts of the gentiles ran to the knowledge of faith. These gentiles open the mouth of the heart in the food of sacred reading and eat in secret like a poor person, because reading they receive the words of life with haste and silence.
When our Redeemer sought the straits of death, he expanded his faith among the gentiles and stretched out the holy Church into the innumerable hearts of believers. To her it is said through the prophet: Enlarge the place of your tent, and stretch out the skins of your tabernacles, do not spare; make your cords long and strengthen your stakes, for you will penetrate to the right and to the left, and your seed will inherit the gentiles, from the book of Isaiah, chapter fifty-four, verse two. This breadth of the earth certainly would not have happened unless he first scorned by dying the life we know and showed by rising the life we do not know.

Chapter 17: Holy Preachers

Holy men, when they deliver the word of preaching to good minds, become as it were providers for each soul to be joined to the only-begotten Son. And in the things they speak about the Lord, they show in themselves the riches of virtues, so that they may draw others more quickly to following God, inasmuch as they show to their hearers in themselves what they narrate.
Each preacher of holy faith, bearing in himself the ornaments of virtues, both arranges the hearing of the holy Church through obedience of discretion and adorns the hands through the merit of good work. For each preacher, the breadth of goodness is like a spacious place for dwelling in the hearer's heart.
Hence to certain ones it is said: Receive us, we have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one. You are not restricted by us, but you are restricted in your own affections, from Paul's second letter to the Corinthians, chapter six, verse twelve. It is as if it were openly said to them: Make a spacious place of mind for receiving doctrine, but remain narrow for thinking carnal thoughts.
There are many who are prepared to support their teachers with temporal wages, but holy preachers do not wish to receive temporal things unless they first obtain eternal things. For if they do not find fruit in souls, they disdain to receive bodily wages. Holy preachers, when they obtain the life of their hearers through preaching, immediately give thanks to him from whose gift they have received this, so that they attribute nothing to themselves in that work, but report acts of thanksgiving with the gains of souls to the Author of all.
Holy preachers, although they now shine forth both in understanding and in life for understanding and proclaiming higher things, nevertheless still feel in themselves the contradiction of the flesh. For they see another law in their members fighting against the law of their mind and making them captive to the law of sin, as Paul's letter to the Romans, chapter seven, verse twenty-three states. Because lest the greatness of revelations exalt them, there has been given to them a thorn in their flesh, from Paul's second letter to the Corinthians, chapter twelve. Holy preachers have treasure in earthen vessels, so that the sublimity may be of God's power and not from themselves.
For those who speak of heavenly things through the flesh, yet still feel contradiction from vice in the flesh, what else do they do but carry riches on the twisted backs of camels?
Holy preachers prefer that God be loved rather than feared. But if they do not instill fear, they do not lead to the love of intimate affection. Hence they customarily speak first of terrible things and afterward of sweet things. As it is said through the Psalmist: They will speak of the power of your terrible deeds, and they will narrate your greatness, from the one hundred forty-sixth Psalm, verse six.
The utterances of holy preaching are sometimes expressed as arrows, because in that they strike vices they pierce through the hearts of those living badly. Of these arrows it is said to the coming Redeemer: Your arrows are sharp, most powerful one; peoples will fall under you in their hearts, from the forty-fourth Psalm, verse six. Of this Isaiah says: I will send from those who have been saved to the nations, to the sea, to Africa, to Lydia, holding arrows, to Italy and to Greece, from the book of Isaiah, chapter sixty-six, verse nineteen.
It is written: Lord, bend down your heavens and descend, from the one hundred forty-third Psalm, verse five. Who therefore is signified by the name of heavens but the order of preachers? Unless therefore holy preachers were to descend from that summit of internal contemplation which they attain to our weakness through most humble preaching, as by a certain bending down, they would never beget children in faith. Indeed they could not benefit us if they persisted in the erectness of their own height.
If holy men wished to preach all that they grasp when they are intoxicated in heavenly contemplation, and did not rather temper their knowledge with a certain moderation and sobriety, who in the still narrow bosom of understanding could grasp those streams of the heavenly fountain? When holy teachers draw themselves back in their preaching, they pour the knowledge of divinity into our hearts. For God would by no means descend to us if his preachers remained unbending in the rigor of contemplation.
The heavens are bent that the Lord may descend, because holy preachers are bowed down that we may be born in the new light of faith. Since if they did not condescend to our weakness, they would never raise us to their own height. A law is placed upon preachers, that they fulfill by living what they hasten to persuade by speaking. For the authority of speaking is lost when the voice is not supported by action.
Each spiritual preacher of the holy universal Church inspects himself with careful attention in all that he says, lest in what he rightly preaches he exalt himself by the vice of pride, lest his life disagree with his tongue, lest he lose in himself the peace he announces in the Church when he teaches well but lives badly.
The holy preacher strives with utmost effort both to defend by speaking what he lives and to adorn by living what he says against the slanderous rumors of adversaries. Nor in all these things does he seek his own glory but the Author's, and he esteems that he has received all the grace of wisdom, which he received that he might speak, not by his own merits but by the intercessions of those for whom he speaks.
Each chosen preacher surpasses himself when he casts himself down through humility, because he profits more for his own reward by attributing to the merits of others the good things he is able to accomplish. He judges himself unworthy of all, even when he lives worthily for all. The preacher knows very well that good things made known to people can scarcely be without danger. And although he perceives himself to be wise, he would nevertheless prefer to be wise and not be seen as such, and he fears in every way this exposure that comes through speaking.
And if it were permitted, he desires to be silent, since he sees that silence is safer for many, and he considers those happier whom a lower place within the holy Church conceals through silence. While the preacher is compelled to speaking by the force of charity, he undertakes the duty of speaking from necessity, but he seeks the leisure of silence from great desire. He keeps this in his wish, he exercises that in his ministry. But the arrogant do not know this manner of speaking; for they do not speak because occasions arise, but they desire occasions to arise so that they may speak.
Holy preachers consider this their portion, if indeed they themselves rejoice inwardly about wisdom, but outwardly restrain others from error. Nor do they so depart from themselves in speaking that they place the joy of mind in the display of eloquent speech; but they meditate on the good of knowledge in the secret of the heart, and they rejoice there where they perceive it, not where they are compelled to make it known among so many snares of temptations.
When preachers make known the good they have received, with charity intervening in the middle, they rejoice from the progress of their hearers and not from their own display.
It often happens that wise men, when they consider that they are not being heard, impose silence on their mouth. But frequently when they observe that the wicked deeds of the unrighteous grow while they remain silent and do not rebuke, they sustain a certain force of their spirit so that they burst forth into speech of open correction.
The prophet Jeremiah, when he had imposed on himself silence from preaching, saying: I will not remember him, nor will I speak anymore in his name, immediately added: And there was in my heart as it were a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary, not able to bear it, for I heard the reproaches of many. This is from the book of Jeremiah, chapter twenty, verse nine.
The hearts of the just are inflamed when they see the uncorrected deeds of the wicked growing, and they believe themselves participants in the guilt of those whom they permit to grow in iniquity by remaining silent. The prophet David, after he had imposed silence on himself, saying: I set a guard to my mouth when the sinner stood against me, I was dumb and humbled and kept silence from good things, from the thirty-third Psalm, verse two, in that very silence of his burned with this zeal of charity, and immediately added: And my pain was renewed; my heart grew hot within me, and in my meditation fire will burn, from the same Psalm, verse four.
The heart grew hot within, because the ardor of love refused to emanate outwardly through the admonition of speech. Fire burned in the meditation of the heart, because rebuke of offenders cooled from correction by the mouth.
Holy preachers strike their adversaries with their words as with certain javelins, but they protect themselves with arms, that is, with miracles, so that both how much they should be heard may sound through the assault of javelins, and how much they should be revered may shine clear through the arms of miracles.
That one is a learned preacher in the holy Church who both knows how to bring forth new things about the sweetness of the kingdom and to speak old things about the terror of punishment, so that either penalties may terrify those whom rewards do not invite. Let each one hear about the kingdom that he may love, let him hear about punishment that he may fear, so that if love does not draw the sluggish soul clinging vehemently to earth toward the kingdom, fear may threaten eternal punishment.
Some laudably desire the office of preaching, and to this some are laudably drawn though compelled. We clearly recognize this if we consider the deeds of two prophets, one of whom freely offered himself that he should be sent to preach, to which the other refused to go with fear.
Isaiah offered himself freely to the Lord seeking whom he should send, saying: Here I am, send me, from the book of Isaiah, chapter six, verse eight. But Jeremiah is sent, and yet humbly resists that he should be sent, saying: Ah, ah, ah, Lord God, behold I do not know how to speak, for I am a child, from the book of Jeremiah, chapter one, verse six.
Behold from both a different voice came forth externally, but it did not emanate from a different fountain of love. In both prophets it must be subtly observed that both he who refused did not fully resist, and he who wished to be sent saw himself first purified by the coal from the altar, lest anyone dare to approach sacred mysteries unpurified, or lest one whom heavenly grace has chosen proudly contradict under the appearance of humility.
It is written: Who produces hay on the mountains and grass for the service of people, from the one hundred forty-sixth Psalm, verse eight. What is demonstrated by grass except the sustenance of preachers? For hay is produced on the mountains and grass for the service of people when the lofty ones of this world, called to the knowledge of faith, bestow transitory foods on holy preachers serving them spiritually in the journey of this life.
For frequently preaching comes to the ears, but when internal grace ceases it does not pass through to the hearts of the hearers. Of the words of this preaching it is said on account of the elect: For your arrows have passed through, from the seventy-sixth Psalm, verse nineteen. The arrows of God truly pass through when the words of his preaching descend from ears to hearts.

Chapter 18: Divine Mysteries and Miracles

The mysteries of divine power, which cannot be comprehended, should not be discussed by understanding but venerated by faith. We must know that whatever can be comprehended by human reason can no longer be wonderful. But the sole reason in miracles is the power of the one performing them.
However much the soul may strive, it does not suffice to penetrate even itself perfectly; how much less the magnitude of him who was able to create the soul? When the prophet David labored in understanding God's knowledge, growing weary and failing he said: Your knowledge has become too wonderful for me, it is strengthened, and I cannot attain to it, from the one hundred thirty-eighth Psalm, verse six.
The miracles of our Lord and Savior are to be received in such a way that they are both believed to have been done in truth, and yet through their significance they indicate something to us. The works of our Redeemer both show something through power and speak something through mystery.
This is well signified by that blind man who sat begging beside the road, as the Gospel of Luke, chapter twenty-eight, verse thirty-five relates. Therefore when our Creator approached Jericho, the blind man returned to sight, because when the Divinity took on the defect of our flesh, the human race received the light it had lost. For from whence God suffers human things, thence is humanity raised to divine things.
Perfect men, because they can somehow touch the mystery of intimate sweetness by tasting it beforehand through contemplation of mind, as from a certain flash of lightning, strive always to recall its memory and to pour it forth by speaking. Hence the Psalmist aptly admonishes us saying: Light has risen for the just, and joy for the upright of heart. Rejoice, you just, in the Lord, and give praise to the memory of his holiness, from the ninety-sixth Psalm, verse eleven.
What we cannot understand and penetrate concerning the mystery of Christ's incarnation, we humbly reserve to the power of the Holy Spirit, so that no one may proudly dare either to despise or to denounce what he does not understand, but let him commit to the fire what he reserves to the Holy Spirit.

Chapter 19: The Holy Martyrs

None of the elect comes into this life who has not endured adversities from the ancient enemy. Moreover, they have been members of our Redeemer even those who from the very beginning of the world, while living piously, suffered cruel things. Abel showed himself to be a member of our Redeemer, who signified his death, of whom it is written: Like a lamb before its shearer he will be silent and will not open his mouth, from the book of Isaiah, chapter fifty-seven, verse seven, not only pleasing in sacrifice but also by dying in silence.
From the very beginning of the world the ancient enemy attempted to destroy the body of our Redeemer, who beginning from the first pure men advanced by raging all the way to the very head of the Church.
The holy martyrs, caught in the warfare of tribulations, when at one and the same time they endure some striking them and some persuading them, oppose to those the shield of patience, against these they hurl the javelins of doctrine. The martyrs scorn rising enemies by suffering, but they bring back wavering citizens to salvation by compassion. They resist those lest they draw away others; they fear for these lest they utterly lose the life of righteousness.
Let us see Paul the apostle, soldier of God's camp, fighting against both. He says: Outside, conflicts; inside, fears, from Paul's second letter to the Corinthians, chapter seven, verse five. The holy martyrs skillfully extend themselves toward both, and when they are perhaps struck with tribulations, they thus undertake exterior battles that they solicitously think lest the interiors of their neighbors be torn. Thus holy men strong in the battle line stand ready, that on one side they may strike opposing breasts with javelins, on the other side they may protect with shield the weak placed behind, and thus they keep watch on both sides with swiftness of circumspection, so that both before themselves they may strike down the bold, and behind themselves they may defend the trembling from wounds.
With these elect ones our Lord destroys the adversaries of faith, with these he descends to the battles of preaching, who can know divine things, who know how to have perfect understanding about the Trinity, which is God. Christ goes to battle against the enemies of faith with those who, when they drink the streams of doctrine, do not bend the rectitude of their works. These go forth to war with Christ as leader, who show by their work what they announce with their mouth, who drink the streams of doctrine spiritually, yet are not bent carnally in wicked works.
Our leader brought with him to the battle of preaching such men who, despising the safety of their bodies, would prostrate their enemies by dying and would overcome their swords not with arms and swords but with patience. Our martyrs came armed to battle under their leader, but with trumpets, jars, and lamps. They sounded with trumpets when they preached; they broke the jars when they opposed their bodies, to be destroyed in their passion, to hostile swords. They shone with lamps when after the dissolution of their bodies they gleamed with miracles.
And immediately the enemies were turned to flight, because while they beheld the bodies of the dead martyrs gleaming with miracles, broken by the light of truth, they believed what they had attacked. Our soldiers sounded with trumpets that the jars might be broken. The jars were broken that the lamps might appear. The lamps appeared that the enemies might be turned to flight. That is, the martyrs preached until their bodies were dissolved in death. Their bodies were dissolved in death that they might gleam with miracles; they gleamed with miracles that they might prostrate their enemies with divine light, so that they might by no means resist God standing erect, but might fear him in subjection.
The martyrs of Christ hold the grace of preaching as great, but the usefulness of bodies as least. For whoever makes the usefulness of the body more than the grace of preaching holds the trumpet in the left hand and the jar in the right. For if the grace of preaching is attended to in the first place and the usefulness of the body in the second place, it is certain that trumpets are held in the right hands and jars in the left.
When a just person is made in the death of passion for truth, he is recovered in the greenness of eternal life; and he who flourished here through faith, there flourishes through sight. Often from the passion of the just, each of the faithful are multiplied in love of the heavenly homeland and receive the greenness of spiritual life, while they rejoice that he acted bravely for God. When a just person is extinguished bodily, it is most certain that by the very example of his passion he raises up the hearts of many and shows greenness from the rectitude of faith.
The holy people of the Church, when they have begun to suffer adversities grievously and have seen their weak ones slip toward worse things, recall to mind the times of their peace when they fed their faithful ones with the abundance of their preaching. Hence it is aptly said figuratively through blessed Job: I who was once wealthy am suddenly crushed, from the book of Job, chapter sixteen, verse thirteen.
In that he asserted himself suddenly crushed, he designated the improvident mind of the weak. Who, while they do not know how to foresee the evils that are to come, they become so much more grievous to them as they are also endured unexpectedly by them. Each chosen one loves martyrdom through the virtue of the spirit, which he does not want through the weakness of the flesh. A certain one trembles through the flesh toward punishments, through the spirit exults toward glory. Each one by not willing wills the torture of martyrdom, and by hating loves it, just as we also, when we seek the joy of salvation, we take the bitter cup of purgation. Indeed the bitterness in the cup displeases, but the health to be restored through bitterness pleases.
In the voice of the holy martyrs it is said through the Psalmist: You have humbled us in the place of affliction, and the shadow of death has covered us, from the forty-third Psalm, verse twenty. Therefore the shadow of death is understood as the death of the flesh, because just as true death is that by which the soul is separated from God, so the shadow of death is that by which the flesh is separated from the soul. Those who are known to die not in spirit but in flesh alone say by no means that they are covered with true death but with the shadow of death.
For the shadow of death oppresses the elect of God when the death of the flesh, which is the image of eternal death, separates them from this life, because just as that separates the soul from God, so this separates the body from the soul.
The place of affliction is the present life. Therefore the holy martyrs are humbled in this place of affliction because they are exalted in eternal life, that is, in the place of joy. Those therefore who strive toward the eternal homeland now temporally despise themselves in the place of affliction, so that then they may be truly exalted in the place of joy.
Although the occasion of persecution is lacking in this time of peace, nevertheless our peace also has its martyrdom, because even if we do not submit the neck of flesh to the sword, yet with spiritual joy we slaughter carnal desires in the mind. Therefore if we do not lay down our body in passion for Christ, at least in time of peace let us conquer our soul. God is appeased by this sacrifice. He approves in the judgment of his mercy the victory of our peace; he looks upon the struggle of our heart, and he who rewards after they have conquered now helps those fighting.

Chapter 20: The Persecutors of Martyrs

The ancient enemy of the Church gnashes his teeth against her, as it were, and gazes upon her as with terrible eyes, because through some he exercises cruelties, and through others he devises what he may exercise. The teeth of this enemy are the persecutors and executioners of the good, who tear the members of the Church while they afflict her elect with their persecutions.
The eyes of the ancient enemy are those who devise evils to do against her and inflame the cruelties of her persecutors with their counsels. The ancient adversary of the Church rages against the Church with his teeth when through cruel reprobates he persecutes the life of the good in her. He gazes upon her with terrible eyes because through the counsels of the wicked he does not cease to seek out evils by which to afflict her always more severely.
It should be known that the reprobate especially persecute in the holy Church those whom they see will be beneficial to many, who crush the life of the carnal with the word of correction and spiritually convert them in the body of the Church. Blessed Job rightly says figuratively: They have struck my jaw, they are satisfied with my punishments, from the book of Job, chapter sixteen, verse eleven. Therefore the perverse strike the jaw of the Church when they persecute good preachers.
And because then the reprobate consider themselves to have done something great when they kill the life of preachers, after the striking of the jaw it is aptly added: They are satisfied with my punishments. For that punishment satisfies them which especially chastises the mind of the Church. Again it is written: God has shut me up with the wicked and has delivered me into the hands of the impious, from the same book, verse twelve.
The people of the elect are shut up with the wicked when their flesh is temporally given to the persecutions of the ancient enemy. They are delivered not to the spirit but to the hands of the impious, because by how much they cannot capture him in mind, by so much more cruelly do they burn against his flesh.
The persecutors of holy faith resisted the martyrs while they were still placed in the body. But after the dissolution of their bodies, when miracles appeared, they were turned to flight, because terrified by fear they ceased from persecuting the faithful.

Chapter 21: The Elect Who Abandon All to Judge with Christ

At the end of the age those come as judges with God who now are unjustly judged for God. Then their light shines so much more widely as the hands of persecutors now more harshly constrict them. Then it will be revealed to the eyes of the reprobate that those who spontaneously abandoned all earthly things were supported by heavenly power. The Truth says to his elect: You who have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of Man sits on the throne of his majesty, you also will sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel, from the Gospel of Matthew, chapter fourteen, verse twenty-eight.
For that court of the internal assembly will not have more than twelve judges, but certainly by the number twelve the quantity of universality is expressed, because whoever, stirred by the goad of divine love, has abandoned possessions here, will without doubt there obtain the summit of judicial power, so that he who now chastises himself with voluntary poverty in consideration of judgment may then come as judge with the Judge.
Of the Spouse of the holy Church it is said through Solomon: Her husband is noble in the gates when he sits with the senators of the land, from the book of Proverbs, chapter thirty-one, verse twenty-three. Hence Isaiah says: The Lord will come to judgment with the elders of his people, from the book of Isaiah, chapter three, verse fourteen. Hence the Truth declares these same senators not now servants but friends, saying: I will no longer call you servants but friends, from the Gospel of John, chapter fifteen, verse fifteen.
Behold, abandoning temporal things, they have purchased the glory of eternal power. What therefore in this world is more foolish than to desert one's own things? And what in eternity is nobler than to come as judges with God?
Our Redeemer decrees the sentence of judgment with the holy preachers of the Church, as he himself says in the Gospel: You who have left all and followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of Man sits on the throne of his majesty, you also will sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. All who are now perfect in the Church have learned the rectitude of their perfection through the Gospel.
Therefore united to our Redeemer and joined to his majesty, they will be seen as judges with him who now have followed perfect works according to evangelical precepts. He who in this age obeyed the precepts of the Lord afterward comes as judge with him to judge peoples, as it is said to those abandoning all: You also will sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
For it is right that those who perfectly abandon the present age at the words of God should dispute with God about peoples in judgment, and that those who now have been intimate with him in voluntary poverty or in prayer should afterward come as judges with God.
It is written: He has called the heavens above and the earth, that he might judge his people, from the forty-ninth Psalm, verse four. For he calls the heavens upward when those who, having abandoned all their things and maintained the way of life of heavenly living, are summoned to sit together in judgment and come as judges with him.
The earth also is called upward when those who had been bound by earthly actions nevertheless sought in them more heavenly gains than earthly, to whom in the end it is said: I was a stranger and you took me in, I was naked and you clothed me, from the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-five, verse forty-two.
Elect men abandoning all things are not judged but reign, who also transcend the precepts of the law by the virtue of perfection, because they are by no means content to fulfill only what divine law commands to all, but by more excellent desire they seek to exhibit more than they could hear in general precepts.
Each of the elect at the final judgment are not judged but reign, because they come also as judges with their Author. For those abandoning all things have accomplished more by ready devotion than they heard commanded generally. By special command to a few more perfect ones, and not generally to all, is said what the rich young man heard: Go, sell all your things and give to the poor, and come, follow me, from the Gospel of Matthew, chapter ten, verse twenty-one.
For if a general command bound all under this precept, it would certainly be a sin for us to possess anything from this world. But it is one thing that is commanded generally to all through sacred Scripture, another that is commanded specially to the more perfect. The just abandoning all things are rightly not held under general judgment, who have also overcome general precepts by living.
For just as those who, with treachery urging them, scorn to be bound by law are not judged but perish, so those who, with piety urging them, advance even beyond the general precepts of divine law are not judged but reign.
Paul the apostle, vessel of election, transcending special precepts, exhibited more in work than he received in the institution of permission. For when he had received that preaching the Gospel he should live from the Gospel, he both conferred the Gospel on those hearing and yet refused to be sustained by the expenses of the Gospel. Why therefore should he be judged in order that he may reign, who received less to keep but found greater things to live by?

Chapter 22: Interpreters of Divine Scripture

Whoever speaks about God must necessarily take care to examine whatever instructs the morals of his hearers, and he should consider this the right order in speaking, if when opportunity for edification requires, he usefully digresses from what he had begun to speak about. For the interpreter of sacred speech should imitate the manner of a river. Indeed a river, while it flows through its channel, if it touches hollow valleys from the side, immediately diverts the course of its current into them; and when it has sufficiently filled them, suddenly it pours itself back into the channel.
Thus certainly, thus should the interpreter of the divine word be, that when he discusses any matter, if perhaps he finds near at hand an occasion for fitting edification, he may turn the waves of speech as to a neighboring valley. And when he has sufficiently flooded the field of instruction at hand, he may return to the channel of his proposed discourse.
Holy men understand in sacred Scripture how they should live morally and raise themselves in contemplation. Each of the interpreters, by how much he has advanced in sacred Scripture, by so much does the same Scripture advance for him, because divine words grow with the reader. For one understands them so much more deeply as he directs himself more deeply into them, because unless the minds of readers have advanced to high things, divine sayings lie as if in the depths, not understood.
If anyone opens a cistern and digs it and does not cover it, and an ox or a donkey falls into it, the owner of the cistern will pay the price of the beasts, from the book of Exodus, chapter twenty-one, verse thirty-three. For what is opening a cistern but penetrating with strong understanding the secrets of sacred Scripture? For what is understood by ox and donkey, that is clean and unclean animal, but any faithful person or unbeliever?
Therefore he who digs a cistern, let him cover it lest an ox or donkey rush into it, that is, he who now understands high things in sacred speech, let him cover sublime meanings through silence before those not grasping them, lest through scandal of mind he kill either a little faithful one or an unbeliever who could have believed. For from the death of beasts he owes the price, because he is convicted of having lost that for which he is held guilty to do penance.
Whoever, arriving at the high streams of knowledge, when he does not cover these things before the brutish hearts of hearers, is made liable to punishment if through his words either a clean or unclean mind
is captured. Before weak and childlike minds, higher knowledge must be concealed, lest the very thing that lifts the heart of teachers to the heights should cause the weakness of hearers to fall into the depths.
As Gregory's letter to Leander explains, chapter three: What are the words of truth if not nourishment for restoring the mind, which we offer as a banquet of speech by discussing them in multiple alternating ways, so that we might dispel the distaste of the invited reader, who is like our dinner guest? When he sees many dishes set before him, he may choose whichever he judges more elegant.
Sometimes we deliberately avoid expounding the clear words of the historical narrative, so that we may reach the obscure passages more quickly. At other times, passages cannot be understood according to the letter, because when taken only at the surface level, they produce not instruction for readers, but error.
When the words of the letter cannot agree with one another when compared, they show that there is something else to be sought in them, as if they speak with certain voices saying: When you see us being demolished at our surface level, seek in us that which may be found within us, arranged and consistent with itself.
From the same letter, chapter four: Sometimes, however, whoever neglects to receive the words of history according to the letter hides from himself the light of truth that has been offered; and when he strives laboriously to find something else within them, he loses what he could have grasped on the outside without difficulty.
For divine speech, just as it wisely exercises through mysteries, so it often refreshes the simple at its surface. It has openly that which nourishes the little ones; it preserves in secret that which holds the minds of the lofty in wonder.
It is like a river, if I may say so, both shallow and deep, in which a lamb can walk and an elephant can swim.
Therefore, as the suitability of each place demands, so the order of exposition changes itself through careful attention, so that it may discover the meaning of divine speech all the more truly, as it alternates through different types of interpretation according to what each matter requires.
Through sacred Scripture, the frivolity of fruitless chatter is carefully restrained by those who expound it, since planting a grove in the temple of God is forbidden.
And we all know without doubt that whenever the stalks of a poorly flourishing crop grow excessively in leaves, the grains swell with lesser fullness in the ears.
From Book one of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily six, paragraph one: It is written in Proverbs, chapter twenty-five, verse two: The glory of kings is to conceal a matter, and the glory of God is to investigate a word. Because it is the honor of men to hide their secrets, and the glory of God is to reveal the mysteries of his speech.
But Truth himself says to his disciples, in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter ten, verse twenty-seven: What I tell you in darkness, speak in the light. That is, openly expound what you hear in the obscurities of allegories.
The very obscurity of God's words is of great usefulness, because it exercises the mind, so that it may be expanded through exertion, and when exercised may grasp what the idle person cannot grasp.

Chapter Twenty-Three: That Sacred Scripture Should Not Be Scrutinized Too Much.

From Morals on Job, book twenty-one, chapter one, paragraph three: Divine pronouncements are sometimes to be examined inwardly, sometimes to be observed outwardly.
For it is written in Proverbs, chapter thirty, verse thirty-three: He who presses the breasts forcefully to draw out milk produces butter, and he who blows his nose vehemently draws out blood.
We press the breasts firmly when we weigh the words of sacred Scripture with subtle understanding, and by this pressing, while we seek milk, we find butter, because while we seek to be nourished even with slight understanding, we are anointed with the abundance of inner richness.
Yet this should not be done excessively or always, lest while milk is sought from the breasts, blood should follow.
Many commentators, when they examine the words of sacred Scripture more than they should, fall into carnal understanding. For he who blows his nose vehemently draws out blood, because what is perceived from excessive spiritual scrutiny becomes carnal.
It is often necessary that we examine some words of sacred law according to the weight of history, lest if the mind investigates these more spiritually than is necessary, blood instead of milk should respond to us from the breasts of its words.
When sacred Scripture mingles certain mystical things in the narration of its works, it is necessary that the stirred mind return to those things to which the very speech of the speaker calls it, as it is given to understand.
It is written in Proverbs, chapter twenty-five, verse sixteen: If you have found honey, eat what is sufficient for you, lest perhaps being satisfied you vomit it.
To find honey is to taste the sweetness of holy understanding. It is eaten sufficiently when our intelligence is kept under control according to the measure of reason.
For he who is satisfied vomits the honey, who desiring to penetrate more than he can grasp, loses even that from which he could have been nourished.
From Morals on Job, book twenty, chapter eight, paragraph eighteen: He who desires to eat the sweetness of spiritual understanding beyond what he can grasp, vomits even what he had eaten, because while he seeks to understand the highest things beyond his strength, he loses even what he had understood well.
The glory of the invisible Creator, which when moderately sought lifts us up, when scrutinized beyond our strength crushes us.
Hence it is rightly said through Solomon in Proverbs, chapter twenty-five, verse twenty-seven: As it is not good for one who eats much honey, so he who is a scrutinizer of majesty will be overwhelmed by glory.
Whatever we do not understand in sacred Scripture, we should not reproach proudly, but venerate humbly.
From Book two of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily five, paragraph six: Hence it is also written of the Lord in Psalm ten, verse five: His eyelids question the sons of men.
His eyelids are his judgments, which close something to us and open something. The eyelids of God, that is, his judgments, question us by opening, whether we are lifted up by understanding. They question us by closing, whether we despise what we cannot understand.

Chapter Twenty-Four: On the Continual Growth of the Holy Church.

From Book two of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily ten, paragraph twenty-two: The holy Church of the elect, when it lifts itself from this world in holy prayers with burning love, ascends through the desert which it abandons like a column of smoke from the spices of myrrh and frankincense, as the Song of Songs, chapter three, verse six says.
Smoke is born from incense, and it is said through the Psalmist in Psalm one hundred forty, verse two: Let my prayer be directed like incense in your sight.
Smoke usually draws out tears. Therefore, smoke from spices is the compunction of prayer conceived from the virtues of love.
From Morals on Job, book one, chapter thirty-six, paragraph fifty-four: The holy Church ascends like a column of smoke from spices, because from the virtues of its life it advances daily in the uprightness of inner incense, and does not flow away scattered through thoughts, but constrains itself within the secrets of the heart in a rod of strictness.
The holy Church, which acts daily as it never ceases to reconsider and review, has myrrh and frankincense in its work, but powder in its thought.
And it is well said myrrh and frankincense. For frankincense is burned to the Lord in sacrifice according to the law. But through myrrh dead bodies are preserved, lest they be corrupted by worms.
Therefore they offer a sacrifice of myrrh and frankincense who both afflict the flesh, lest the vices of corruption dominate them, and burn a fragrant sacrifice of their love in the sight of the Lord.
It should be greatly noted that in the Church, the virtues of those who work well are called not ointments, but powders.
For when we do any good things, we offer ointments. But when we also review the very good things we do, and attend by the judgment of review lest anything wrong be in them, we make powder from ointments, so that we may burn our prayer to the Lord more subtly through discretion and love.
From Morals on Job, book eighteen, chapter forty-eight, paragraph seventy-eight: The holy Church, desiring to see the beauty of her Spouse in his divinity, yet unable, because the form of his eternity, which she longed to behold, was hidden from her eyes by his assumed humanity, says sorrowfully in the Song of Songs, chapter two, verse nine: Behold, he stands behind our wallas if to say openly: I desire to see him now in the form of his divinity, but I am still excluded from the vision of him by the wall of his assumed flesh.
From Book two of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily one, paragraph fifteen: To human eyes he showed what our Redeemer assumed from mortal nature, and in himself remained invisible. To the Church seeking to see him in the open, he stood as if behind a wall, because he did not present himself to be seen in manifest majesty.
For he stood as if behind a wall, because he showed the nature of humanity which he assumed, and hid the nature of divinity from human eyes.
From Book two of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily four, paragraph fifteen: The holy Church, or each elect soul, is a friend to the heavenly Spouse through love, a dove through spirit, beautiful through the beauty of character.
When it is now led out from the corruption of the flesh, winter without doubt passes away for it, because the torpor of the present life departs.
Rain also departs and recedes, because when it is led to contemplate almighty God in his own substance, the necessary drops of words will no longer be needed, so that the rain of preaching should be poured in.
For what it was able to hear less, it will see more. Then flowers appear on the earth, when the Church begins to taste beforehand certain beginnings of sweetness from the life of eternal blessedness, and, going out, smells as if already in flowers what, after it has gone out, it will have more abundantly in fruit.
From the same work, homily three, paragraph fourteen: The litter of our king, mentioned in the Song of Songs, chapter three, verse nine, is the holy Church, which is constructed from strong Fathers, that is, from incorruptible minds. It is rightly called a litter, because it itself carries souls daily to the eternal banquet of its Creator.
Concerning the holy Church it is written in Psalm sixty-seven, verse fourteen: The wings of the dove covered with silver, and the back of it in the appearance of gold.
For she who here is filled with the spirit of gentleness, like a dove has silvered wings, contains in the back the appearance of gold, because here she clothes her preachers with the light of speech. In the age to come, however, she shows in herself the brilliance of glory.
A very great multitude of the faithful in the beginning of the nascent Church reached the kingdom through the blood of martyrdom. Our king made a purple ascent in the litter, as the Song of Songs, chapter three, verse ten says, because that which is seen clearly within is reached through the tribulation of blood.
From Morals on Job, book nine, chapter eleven, paragraph eighteen: One thing is the beauty of the Church's character, in which it is now seen, and another the beauty of rewards, in which it will then be lifted up through the form of its Creator. Its members, namely all the elect, because they proceed simply to all things, are called its eyes of doves, which shine with great light, because they also flash with the miracles of signs.
From Morals on Job, book two, chapter fifty-two, paragraph eighty-two: Your lips are like a scarlet ribbon, O spouse, as the Song of Songs, chapter four, verse three says. A ribbon binds the hair of the head. The lips of the spouse are like a ribbon, because by the exhortation of the holy Church, all scattered thoughts in the minds of hearers are bound, lest they flow away loosely, lest they spread themselves through illicit things, lest scattered they depress the eyes of the heart, but rather gather themselves as if to one intention, while the ribbon of holy preaching binds them.
From Morals on Job, book twenty-four, chapter eight, paragraph seventeen: How rightly he declares it scarlet, because the preaching of the saints flames with the heat of charity alone.
Hence again it is written in the Song of Songs, chapter four, verse five: Your two breasts are like two fawns, twin roe deer, which feed among the lilies.
For what are the two breasts, if not the two peoples coming from Judea and from the Gentiles, who in the body of the holy Church are fixed through the purpose of wisdom in the secret of the heart?
Those who are chosen in the holy Church from the Jewish or Gentile people are therefore compared to the fawns of roe deer, because through humility they understand themselves as small and sinful. But as they run through charity, if any obstacles from the hindrance of temporality appear, they pass beyond them, and with leaps of contemplation they ascend to the heights.
To do these things, they look upon the examples of preceding saints. Hence they are said to feed among the lilies. For what is declared by the lilies, except the life of those who truly say in Paul's second letter to the Corinthians, chapter two, verse fifteen: We are the good fragrance of Christ in every place?
As the peel of a pomegranate, so are your cheeks, apart from your hidden things, as the Song of Songs, chapter six, verse six says. The cheeks of the holy Church are the spiritual Fathers who now flash with miracles in her, and appear venerable as if in her face.
For when we see many doing wonders, prophesying things to come, leaving the world perfectly, burning with heavenly desires, the cheeks of the holy Church redden like the peel of a pomegranate.
Well then, when the spouse wondered at the cheeks of the Church, he added: Apart from your hidden thingsas if it were said openly: Those things which are not hidden in you are indeed great, but those which are hidden are very ineffable.
From Morals on Job, book four, chapter eleven, paragraph nineteen: The Church is often described as compared to the dawn, which through the knowledge of faith is changed from the darkness of its sins into the clear light of righteousness.
Hence the spouse also admires her, saying in the Song of Songs, chapter six, verse nine: Who is she who ascends like the rising dawn? For the Church of the elect rises like the dawn, which abandons the darkness of former wickedness and transforms itself in the splendor of new light.
From Morals on Job, book nineteen, chapter twelve, paragraph nine: Just as the age of each individual person, so the age of the holy Church is described. For she was little when, fresh from birth, she could not preach the word of life.
Hence now it is said of her in the Song of Songs, chapter eight, verse eight: Our sister is little and has no breasts. The holy Church, before it advanced through the growth of virtue, could not offer the breasts of preaching to any weak hearers.
But the Church is called adult when, joined to the Word of God, filled with the Holy Spirit, she becomes pregnant with the conception of children through the ministry of preaching, whom she brings forth by exhortation and gives birth by conversion.
From Morals on Job, book seventeen, chapter twenty-seven, paragraph thirty-nine: The holy Church, after it has described the death and resurrection and ascension of the Lord, cries out to him, full of prophetic spirit, in the Song of Songs, chapter eight, verse fourteen: Flee, my beloved, flee. As if to say: You who have been made comprehensible from flesh, exceed our understanding from your divinity, and remain incomprehensible to us in yourself.

Chapter Twenty-Five: On the Prosperity or Adversity of This World.

From Morals on Job, book five, chapter one, paragraph one: Holy men, when they see that the prosperity of this world abounds for them, are troubled with fearful suspicion. For they fear lest they receive here the fruit of their labors.
They fear lest divine justice, seeing some hidden wound in them, should heap upon them external gifts while repelling them from intimate ones.
When silent elect men consider that they do good only to please God alone, and do not exult in the very abundance of their prosperity, they indeed fear less the hidden judgments against themselves because of prosperity. But nevertheless, they bear these same prosperous things with difficulty, because they impede them from their intimate intention, and they tolerate with annoyance the enticements of present life, because they are not ignorant that through these they are somehow delayed in internal desire.
In this world, honor occupies more than contempt, and the height of prosperity weighs more than the adversity of necessity. For through the latter, sometimes when a person is pressed outwardly, he is released more freely to desire what is within. But through the former, the mind, while it is compelled to obey many things, is held back from the course of its desire.
Holy men fear prosperity more than adversity in this age, for they know that the mind, when pressed by pleasant occupation, is sometimes willingly diverted to external things.
They know that often a secret thought deceives it in such a way that it does not know how it is being changed.
Chosen men consider the eternal goods which they desire, and recognize how nothing is all that temporally smiles pleasantly.
Their mind tolerates all the prosperity of this world with such difficulty as it is wounded by love of heavenly happiness. And it is lifted up all the more in the rejection of present sweetness, as it sees that this furtively flatters itself in contempt of eternal glory.
From the same work, chapter two, paragraph two: Holy men thus trample prosperity of the age in despising it, just as they also tolerate its adversity in trampling it.
Through great height of mind, placing both adversity and prosperity of the world beneath themselves, they say in Psalm one hundred thirty-eight, verse twelve: As its darkness, so also its light.
As if to say more openly: Just as its sorrows do not press the strength of our intention, so neither do pleasant things corrupt it.
Holy men, who recognize themselves as wretched in the hardship of this exile, flee from shining in its prosperity. Hence it is well said through blessed Job, chapter three, verse twenty: Why is light given to the wretched?
For light is given to the wretched when those who, contemplating sublime things, recognize themselves as wretched in this pilgrimage, receive the brightness of transitory prosperity.
When the very just weep because they return late to their homeland, they are compelled to bear in addition the burdens of honor. Love of eternal things crushes them, and glory from temporal things smiles upon them.
Chosen men, when they consider what things hold them in the lowest places, and what things they do not see in the highest, what things support them on earth, but what they have lost from heavenly things, are bitten by sorrow over their prosperity, because even if they see that they are by no means completely oppressed by it, they nevertheless anxiously consider that their thought is divided between love of the Lord and his dispensation.
From Morals on Job, book three, chapter thirty-one, paragraph sixty-one: It should be known that often in prosperity the mind is touched by troublesome temptation, but nevertheless sometimes we both suffer adversity outwardly, and are wearied inwardly by the impulse of temptation, so that both scourges torture the flesh, and yet carnal suggestion floods the mind.
From Morals on Job, book four, chapter twelve, paragraphs twenty-three and twenty-four: Blessed Job, considering with how much confidence the human race is lifted up in prosperous matters, or with how much disturbance it is broken by adversities, returns in mind to that state of unchangeableness which he could have had in paradise, and by cursing declared how contemptible he saw the fall of mortality varying through prosperity and adversity, saying in Job, chapter three, verse three: Let the day perish in which I was born, and the night in which it was said: A man is conceived.
It is as if there is a certain day when the prosperity of this world smiles. But this day ends in night, because often temporal prosperity leads to the darkness of tribulation.
The prophet had despised the day of prosperity when he said in Jeremiah, chapter seventeen, verse sixteen: I have not desired the day of man; you know. The Lord announced that he would suffer the night of tribulation in the last time of his incarnation, when through the Psalmist he said as if from the past in Psalm fifteen, verse seven: Until night my reins reproved me.
From Morals on Job, book twelve, chapter two, paragraph two: It is established for man either how much worldly prosperity follows him, or how much adversity strikes him, lest immoderate prosperity lift up his elect, or excessive adversity weigh them down.

Chapter Twenty-Six: Concerning Heretics.

From Morals on Job, book nineteen, chapter eighteen, paragraph twenty-seven: All authors of heretical wickedness, when they do not fear to interpret the dispensation of God perversely, assuredly drag their subject peoples not into that way which is Christ, but into pathlessness.
Concerning these, poured-out strife is also rightly spoken, because they contradict one another by turns with their own assertions. Arius, accepting three persons in the Divinity, also believed three gods. Against him Sabellius, accepting one God, believed there to be one person.
Between these, the holy Church, holding unswervingly the straight path of its preaching, both preaching one God, asserts three persons against Sabellius, and asserting three persons, confesses one God against Arius.
Because Manichaeus discovered virginity praised in sacred Scripture, he condemned marriages. But on the contrary Jovinian, because he learned that marriages were granted, despised the purity of virginity.
Hence it happens that, with heretics always confused by perverse understanding, their wickedness both agrees with itself in fault, and differs in opinion.
The holy Church walks through the midst of the disputes of heretics on both sides with ordered peace, and thus knows how to receive the higher goods so that it also knows how to venerate the lower, so that it neither equates the highest with the lowest, nor despises the lowest when it venerates the highest.
From Morals on Job, book eleven, chapter twenty-eight, paragraph thirty-nine: Heretics exhibit fraud toward God, because they establish things which by no means please him on whose behalf they speak. And him, while they strive as if to defend, they offend, while they run in his adversity, whom they seem to serve by preaching.
He is an enemy and defender, who attacks the God whom he preaches.
From the Preface to Job, chapter six, paragraph fifteen, and Morals on Job, book eleven, chapter twenty-eight, paragraph thirty-nine: Every heretic is indeed an enemy and defender of almighty God, because from that by which he strives as if to defend him, from that he opposes his truth.
But because nothing can be hidden from God, he judges in them what they feel within, not what they seem to serve outwardly.
From Morals on Job, book eighteen, chapter thirty, paragraph forty-nine: All heretics, when they mockingly despise the preaching and fruitfulness of the holy Church, what else do they do but despise the birth of their mother?
We not undeservedly call her also their mother, because from her go out those who speak against her, as John bears witness, who says in his first letter, chapter two, verse nineteen: They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would certainly have remained with us.
From the Preface to blessed Job, chapter seven, paragraph sixteen: All heretics in what they say about the Lord, while not with right intention but with desire of temporal glory, they desire to be seen as preachers, are called old age alone.
The minds of the faithful lift themselves up to contemplate the things above. But when the words of heretics seek to pervert those rightly contemplating, they try as if to destroy the mirror.
Unless heretics despised the Lord, they would by no means have perverse feelings about him. And unless they drew the heart of oldness, they would not err in understanding the new life. And unless they destroyed the contemplation of the good, the heavenly judgments would by no means reject them with such strict examination for the fault of their words.
Therefore by despising the Lord, heretics retain themselves in the oldness of their iniquity, but by retaining oldness they harm the contemplation of the upright by their wicked speeches.
From Morals on Job, book five, chapter eleven, paragraph twenty-eight: Heretics have this peculiarity, that they mix good things with bad things, so that they may easily deceive the understanding of the hearer.
If heretics always said perverse things, being recognized more quickly in their perversity, they would scarcely persuade what they wanted. Again, if they always thought rightly, they certainly would not be heretics.
But while they serve both purposes by the art of deceiving, both they infect good things from bad things, and they hide bad things from good things so that they may be received.
As one who offers a cup of poison touches the rim of the cup with the sweetness of honey, and while what is sweet is tasted at first contact, even what is deadly is absorbed without doubt: so heretics mix right things with perverse things, so that by showing good things they may attract hearers to themselves, and by exhibiting evil things they may corrupt them with hidden plague.
From Morals on Job, book sixteen, chapter forty-seven, paragraph sixty: Jeremiah the prophet designates any heretic under the figure of a wild ass, saying in Jeremiah, chapter two, verse twenty-four: A wild ass accustomed in the wilderness, in the desire of its soul, drew in the wind of its love.
A wild ass is indeed a wild animal, and heretics are rightly compared to wild asses in this place, because dismissed into their pleasures they are strangers from the bonds of faith and reason.
Every heretic is like a wild ass accustomed in the wilderness, because while he does not cultivate the earth of his heart by the virtue of discipline, he dwells where there is no fruit.
He draws in the wind of his love in the desire of his soul, because what he has conceived in his mind from desire of knowledge prevails to inflate, not to build up. Against these it is said in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter eight, verse one: Knowledge puffs up, but charity builds up.

Chapter Twenty-Seven: Concerning Faith.

From Book two of the Homilies on the Gospels, homily twenty-six, paragraph eight: Faith is the evidence of those things which cannot appear. For things which are apparent do not have faith, but recognition, as Paul the apostle says in his letter to the Hebrews, chapter eleven, verse one: For faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not appearing.
Isaiah says in chapter seven, verse nine: Unless you believe, you will not understand.
From Morals on Job, book two, chapter forty-six, paragraph seventy-one: For then we truly have wisdom for understanding, when we offer the faith of our belief to all things which the Creator says.
If faith is not born first in our heart, the remaining things cannot be good, even if they seem good. For it is written in the letter to the Hebrews, chapter eleven, verse six: Without faith it is impossible to please God.
From Book two of the Homilies on the Gospels, homily twenty-nine, paragraph three: In the Gospel, Truth says in the Gospel of Mark, chapter sixteen, verse sixteen: He who believes and is baptized will be saved, but he who does not believe will be condemned.
Perhaps each one may say within himself: I have already believed, I will be saved. He speaks truly, if he holds faith by works. For true faith is that which does not contradict by morals what it says by words.
Concerning certain false believers, Paul the apostle says in his letter to Titus, chapter one, verse sixteen: They profess to know God, but by deeds they deny him. Hence John says in his first letter, chapter two, verse four: He who says he knows God and does not keep his commandments is a liar.
Since this is so, we should recognize the truth of our faith in the consideration of our life. For then we are truly faithful, if we fulfill by works what we promise by words.
On the day of baptism we promised to renounce all the works of the ancient enemy and all his pomps. Therefore, let each of you bring back the eyes of your mind to consideration of yourself, and if you keep after baptism what you promised before baptism, rejoice now certain that you are faithful.
But behold, man has scarcely kept what he promised in baptism, and he who should have been faithful has lapsed into practicing evil works, into desiring the pomps of the world. Let us see if he now knows how to lament that he has erred.
For before the merciful judge, even he will not be held deceitful who returns to truth even after he lies, because almighty God, while he willingly receives our repentance, himself by his judgment hides what we have done wrong, and gathers it into the bosom of faith.
From Book two of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily three, paragraph one: Through the belief of holy faith we are known by almighty God, as he himself says of his sheep in the Gospel of John, chapter ten, verse fourteen: I am the good Shepherd, and I know my sheep, and my sheep know me.
From the Pastoral Rule, part three, chapter ten: Thus are all standing in faith, as many members are contained in one body, which are indeed diverse by function, but by which they mutually agree with one another, they become one.
Hence it happens that the foot sees through the eye, and through the feet the eyes walk, the hearing of the ears serves the mouth, and the tongue runs to the hearing of the mouth, the belly supports the hands, the hands work for the belly.
In the very arrangement of the body, therefore, we receive what we should preserve in action. It is therefore very shameful not to imitate what we are.
From Morals on Job, book thirty-three, chapter ten, paragraph eighteen: By the name of cords, faith is sometimes expressed, as it is written in Ecclesiastes, chapter four, verse twelve: A threefold cord is not easily broken, because indeed faith, which is woven from knowledge of the Trinity from the mouth of preachers, remaining strong in the elect, is dispersed only in the heart of the reprobate.

Chapter Twenty-Eight: Concerning Hope.

From the Pastoral Rule, part three, chapter twenty-two: To the one hope of calling one by no means attains, if one does not run with united mind together with neighbors, as the Apostle says in Paul's letter to the Ephesians, chapter four, verse four: One body and one spirit, as you are called in one hope of your calling.
From Morals on Job, book eighteen, chapter forty, paragraph sixty-four: The Apostle testifies that three virtues remain supremely in the heart of the faithful, saying in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter thirteen, verse thirteen: Now there remain faith, hope, and charity. All of these the thief, filled with sudden grace, both received and preserved on the cross.
The thief had faith, who believed the Lord would reign, whom he saw dying equally with himself. He had hope, who requested entrance to his kingdom, saying in the Gospel of Luke, chapter twenty-three, verse forty-two: Remember me when you come into your kingdom.
He also vigorously held charity in his death, who both accused his brother and fellow thief dying for a similar crime of his iniquity, and preached to him the life which he had known, saying in verses forty through forty-one: Do you not fear God, since you are under the same condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive what is worthy of our deeds, but this man has done nothing wrong.
He who came to the cross as such from guilt, behold how he departs from the cross from grace. The same thief confessed the Lord, whom he saw dying with him in human weakness, when the apostles denied him whom they had seen doing miracles by divine power.
From Book two of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily two, paragraph four: As if in gardens each soul dwells, which is now filled with the greenness of hope and with the charity of good works. For the hope of this age is dry, because all things which are loved here wither with haste.
From Morals on Job, book thirteen, chapter five, paragraph five: For he knows well how to subsist in external miseries who knows always how to rejoice from internal hope.
The virtues of the saints bring forth hope, faith, and charity into everything they do, so that what each virtue administers, faith, hope, and charity rejoicing may lead into good work.
From Morals on Job, book five, chapter thirty-two, paragraph fifty-six: Whenever heavenly things are shown to us, the spirit indeed shakes itself with fear, but nevertheless hope presumes.
For hope lifts itself up to dare greater things from that source whence the spirit is troubled, and what things are above it sees first.

Chapter Twenty-Nine: Concerning Charity.

From Morals on Job, book twenty-eight, chapter twenty-two, paragraph forty-six: Charity is called the bond of perfection, because every good which is done is surely bound by it, lest it perish.
For any work is more quickly uprooted by the tempter, if it is found loosened from the bond of charity.
If each person's mind is bound by love of God and neighbor, when motions of temptations suggest to it any unjust things, love itself opposes a barrier to them, and breaks the wave of evil persuasion with the barriers and bolt of intimate love.
From Book one of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily ten, paragraph thirty-one: To do God's commands according to command is of one serving and obeying, but to do them by loving is of one obeying and loving, because through knowledge the charity of mercy is learned, and through the charity of mercy knowledge is multiplied, as if one wing strikes another wing in us, because virtue stirs up virtue.
From Book two of the Homilies on the Gospels, homily twenty-seven, paragraph one: Every commandment is about love alone, and all commandments are one precept, because whatever is commanded is solidified in charity alone.
The Lord's precepts are both many and one: many through diversity of work, one in the root of love.
How this love is to be held, he himself suggests who in many passages of his Scripture commands that friends be loved in him, and enemies be loved because of him.
For he truly has charity, who both loves a friend in God, and loves an enemy because of God.
There are some who love neighbors, but through affection of kinship and flesh. To these, however, in this love sacred speeches do not contradict.
But one thing is what is willingly expended to nature, another what is owed to obedience from charity according to the Lord's precepts.
Those who love their neighbors carnally do not attain those sublime rewards of love, because they expend their love not spiritually, but carnally.
Therefore when the Lord said in the Gospel of John, chapter fifteen, verse twelve: This is my commandment, that you love one another, he immediately added: As I have loved you. As if to say openly: Love to that end for which I have loved you.
One and supreme is the proof of charity, if even he who opposes is loved.
Hence it is that Truth himself both endures the suffering of the cross, and yet expends the affection of love to his own persecutors, saying in the Gospel of Luke, chapter twenty-three, verse thirty-four: Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.
What then is wonderful if disciples love enemies while they live, when even then the Master loves enemies when he is killed?
The virtue of charity, that it may be unconquered in disturbance, should be nourished through mercy in tranquility, so that it may first learn to expend its own things to almighty God, afterwards itself.
In the Gospel, Truth says in the Gospel of John, chapter fifteen, verse fifteen: But I have called you friends, because all things whatsoever I have heard from my Father, I have made known to you.
What are all the things which he heard from his Father, which he wished to make known to his servants, so that he might make them his friends, if not the joys of interior charity, if not those feasts of the heavenly homeland, which he impresses daily on our minds through the breathing of his love?
For when we love things heard from above the heavens, we already know things loved, because love itself is knowledge. Let no one, when he loves someone, immediately think he has charity, unless first he examines the very force of his love.
From Book two of the Homilies on the Gospels, homily thirty-eight, paragraph eleven: For if anyone loves anyone, but does not love because of God, he does not have charity, but thinks he has it.
True charity is when both a friend is loved in God, and an enemy is loved because of God. For he loves because of God those whom he loves, who now also knows how to love those by whom he is not loved.
From Book two of the Homilies on the Gospels, homily nine, paragraph six: Whoever has charity also receives other gifts. Whoever does not have charity, even loses the gifts which he seemed to have received.
It is necessary for us that through everything we do we watch in the custody of charity. True charity is to love a friend in God, and to love an enemy because of God. Whoever does not have it loses every good which he has.
From Book one of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily eight, paragraph six: When we set the battle line of spiritual combat against evil spirits, it is supremely necessary that we always be found united and bound together through charity, and never interrupted through discord.
Whatever good works there may be in us, if charity is lacking, a place is opened in the battle line through the evil of discord, from which the enemy may be able to enter to strike us.
From Book one of the Homilies on the Gospels, homily seventeen, paragraph one: There are two precepts of charity, namely the love of God and of neighbor, and charity cannot be had with less than between two.
For no one is properly said to have charity toward himself, but love tends toward another so that it may be charity.
Our Redeemer sends disciples in pairs to preach, so that he may silently suggest to us that he who does not have charity toward another should by no means undertake the office of preaching.
From Book two of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily one, paragraph five: In a building, stone carries stone, because stone is placed upon stone, and he who carries another is carried by another.
Thus therefore in the holy Church, each one both carries another, and is carried by another. For neighbors mutually support one another, so that through them the building of charity may rise.
For hence Paul admonishes, saying in his letter to the Galatians, chapter six, verse two: Bear one another's burdens, and so you will fulfill the law of Christ.

Chapter Thirty: On Grace That Precedes and Follows Us.

From Book one of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily nine, paragraph two: From the grace of almighty God we can indeed strive toward good works, but we cannot fulfill them if he who commands does not help.
Paul the apostle admonishes disciples, saying in his letter to the Philippians, chapter two, verse twelve: Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. Immediately he added who would work these very good things in them, saying in verse thirteen: For it is God who works in you both to will and to accomplish according to good will.
Hence it is that Truth himself says to disciples in the Gospel of John, chapter fifteen, verse five: Without me you can do nothing.
It must be considered by us, because if our good things are so gifts of almighty God that nothing of ours is in them, why do we seek eternal reward as if for merits? But if they are so ours that they are not gifts of almighty God, why do we give thanks to almighty God from them?
It should be known that our evils are ours alone, but our goods are both of almighty God and ours, because he himself precedes us by inspiring so that we may will, who follows by helping lest we will in vain, but may be able to fulfill what we will.
With grace preceding and good will following, that which is the gift of almighty God becomes our merit.
This Paul well explains in a brief sentence, saying in his first letter to the Corinthians, chapter fifteen, verse ten: I labored more than all of them. Lest he seem to have attributed what he did to his own virtue, he added: Yet not I, but the grace of God with me.
Because Paul was preceded by heavenly gift, he recognized himself as if foreign to his good work, saying: Yet not I. But because preceding grace had made free will in him toward good, by which free will he followed the same grace in work, he added: But the grace of God with meas if to say: In good work I labored not I, but also I.
For in that by which I was preceded by the Lord's gift alone, not I. But in that by which I followed the gift by will, also I.
From Morals on Job, book nineteen, chapter four, paragraph seven: To look upon is of God, to restore to his grace those things which had been lost and destroyed. For by looking upon he restrained the evils of our fickleness and gave great merits of maturity.
From Morals on Job, book seventeen, chapter sixteen, paragraph twenty-two: Blessed Job says in Job, chapter twenty-five, verse five: The moon does not shine, and the stars are not clean in his sight.
Because neither does the holy Church shine with so many miracles by its own virtue, unless the gifts of preceding grace overflow it. Nor are the minds of individual well-living people clean from the stains of sins, if they are judged with mercy removed.
Before the eyes of the strict judge, one's own corruptibility stains each person, unless the grace of the sparing one daily wipes it clean.

Chapter Thirty-One: On the Four Orders of Leaders.

From Book two of the Homilies on Ezekiel, homily nine, paragraph six: The holy Church has received four orders of leaders for the instruction of the faithful peoples, which Paul the apostle enumerates from the gift of the almighty Lord, saying in his letter to the Ephesians, chapter four, verse eleven: He himself gave some indeed as apostles, some as prophets, others as evangelists, others as pastors and teachers.
For he names pastors and teachers as one order of leaders, because he himself truly feeds the flock of God who teaches.
The holy Church had in its beginnings apostles and prophets. But we call prophets not those who were among the old people, but those who arose in the holy Church after the apostles.
In the later time, which is now, it has evangelists and teachers. Because the Gospel is called good news, we indeed call evangelists those who announce the good things of the heavenly homeland to untaught peoples.
Evangelists and teachers were indeed in the earlier time, but by the Lord's granting they remain until now, because we still know daily both that unbelieving peoples are drawn to faith, and that any faithful are instructed in good morals through teachers.

Chapter Thirty-Two: On Pastors of Souls, What Kind Should Be Chosen in the Church.

From the Preface to the first part of the Pastoral Rule: When the necessity of things demands, it must be greatly considered how each one comes to the summit of rule, and having rightly arrived at it how he lives, and living well how he teaches, and teaching rightly with what great consideration he daily recognizes his weakness, lest either humility flee access, or life contradict arrival, or teaching desert life, or presumption exalt teaching.
First therefore let fear temper appetite, afterwards let life commend the teaching office which is undertaken by one not seeking it. And then it is necessary that the good of the pastor which is shown by living should also be spread by speaking.
From the Pastoral Rule, part two, chapter four: In the end, however, it remains that consideration of one's own weakness should depress any perfect works, lest swelling of pride extinguish them before the eyes of the hidden judge.
Isaiah the prophet says in chapter fifty-eight, verse one: Cry out, cease not, lift up your voice like a trumpet. For whoever approaches the priesthood takes up the office of a herald, so that before the coming of the judge, who follows terribly, he himself should proceed crying out.
Therefore if a priest is ignorant of preaching, what voice of crying is a mute herald going to give?
From the Pastoral Rule, part two, chapter eleven: Strong and persevering teachers are to be sought like incorruptible wood, who, always adhering to the instruction of sacred volumes, proclaim the unity of the holy Church, and as if inserted into rings carry the ark of the Lord.
To carry the ark of the Testament with poles is for good teachers to lead the holy Church by preaching to the untaught minds of unbelievers.
They are also commanded to be covered with gold, so that when they sound to others with speech, they themselves also shine with the splendor of life.
It is therefore necessary that those who watch for the office of preaching should not depart from the study of sacred reading.
For to this end the poles are commanded always to be in the rings of the ark, so that when opportunity requires the ark to be carried, no slowness of carrying is generated from inserting the poles, because indeed when something spiritual is inquired by subjects from the pastor, it is very shameful if he then seeks to learn when he should explain the question.
Let the poles adhere to the rings of the ark of the covenant, so that teachers, always meditating on sacred words in their hearts, may lift the ark of the Testament without delay, if they immediately teach whatever is necessary.
Hence the first pastor of the Church well admonishes the other pastors, saying in Peter's first letter, chapter three, verse fifteen: Always prepared for satisfaction concerning that hope which is in us.
As if to say openly: So that no delay may hinder carrying the ark, let the poles never depart from the rings.
From the Pastoral Rule, part two, chapter six, and Morals on Job, book twenty-one, chapter fifteen, paragraphs twenty-two and twenty-five: Holy men, when they preside, should not attend to the power of order in themselves, but the equality of condition. Nor should they rejoice to preside over men, but to profit them.
It should be known that our ancient Fathers are remembered not so much as kings of men as shepherds of flocks.
When the Lord said to Noah and his sons after the flood in Genesis, chapter nine, verses one and two: Increase and multiply, and fill the earth, he added: And let the terror and trembling of you be upon all the animals of the earth.
Man is indeed placed by nature over irrational animals, but not over other men. Therefore it is said to him that he should be feared by animals and not by man, because to be proud against nature is to wish to be feared by an equal.
All who preside should not think in themselves of the power of order, but weigh the equality of condition, for, as we have said before, our ancient Fathers are remembered as shepherds of flocks, and not kings of men.
It is necessary that rulers be feared by subjects, when they perceive that God is scarcely feared by them, so that they may fear to sin at least by human dread, who do not dread divine judgments.
By no means should those in charge be proud from the fear of subjects, in which they seek not their own glory, but the justice of subjects.
But in that they demand fear for themselves from those living perversely, they dominate as if not men, but animals, because indeed from which part subjects are beastly, from that they should also lie prostrate in fear.
From Morals on Job, book thirteen, chapter twenty, paragraph twenty-three: The faces of the holy Church are those who, placed in positions of rule, appear first, so that from their appearance may be the honor of the faithful people, even if something deformed lies hidden in the body.
These prelates over the people certainly lament the faults of the weak, and thus afflict themselves about others' falls as if about their own.
Often good rulers, when they see some return to pardon after faults, but some persist in iniquity, wonder at the hidden judgments of almighty God, but cannot penetrate them. For they are amazed at what they do not understand.
From the Pastoral Rule, part one, chapter ten: He should by all means be drawn to the example of living who, dying to all passions of the flesh, now lives spiritually, who has put prosperity of the world behind, who fears no adversity, who desires only internal things.
To whose intention, well agreeing, the body resists neither entirely through weakness, nor greatly through insult.
He nonetheless should be advanced to the dignity of pastoral office who is not led to desire others' things, but gives his own; who is bent more quickly to forgive through the bowels of piety, but by forgiving nowhere more than is fitting, is inclined from the citadel of righteousness; who perpetrates no illicit things, but deplores things perpetrated by others as his own; who from affection of heart sympathizes with another's weakness, and thus rejoices in the goods of a neighbor as in his own progress.
He rightly reaches the dignity of pontifical excellence who thus shows himself imitable to others in all things he does, so that among them he may not have what at least from past things he blushes at; who so strives to live that he may be able to water also the parched hearts of neighbors with the flowing streams of teaching; who by the use and experience of prayer has already learned that he can obtain from the Lord what he has requested; to whom through the effect a voice now as if especially says in Isaiah, chapter fifty-eight, verse nine: While you are yet speaking I will say: Behold I am here.
If perhaps someone comes to lead us to intercede for him before some powerful man, who is angry with him, but unknown to us, we immediately respond: We cannot come to intercede, because we do not have knowledge of his familiarity.
Therefore if man blushes to become an intercessor before man, of whom he presumes least, with what mind does he seize the place of intercession before God for the people, who does not know himself to be familiar with his grace through merit of life?
Or how will he ask pardon for others from him, who is ignorant whether he is pleased with him?
In which matter there is still something else more carefully to be feared, lest he who is believed able to appease wrath, himself merit it from his own guilt. We all clearly know that when he who displeases is sent to intercede, the mind of the angry one is provoked to worse things.
He who is still bound by earthly desires, let him beware lest, kindling more gravely the anger of the strict judge, while he delights in the place of glory, he become to subjects the author of ruin.
From the Pastoral Rule, part one, chapter eleven: Let each one measure himself carefully, lest he dare assume a place of rule, if vice still damnably reigns in him, lest he whom his own crime depraves desire to become an intercessor for the faults of others.

Chapter Thirty-Three: On Rulers, How They Should Conduct Their Life.

From the Pastoral Rule, part two, chapter two: Let the ruler always be pure in thought, so that no impurity may defile him who has undertaken this office to wipe away the stains of pollution also in the hearts of others.
It is necessary that the hand strive to be clean which cares to wash away the filth of others, lest it stain more badly whatever things it touches, if dirty it holds following mud.
For hence it is said through the prophet in Isaiah, chapter fifty-two, verse eleven: Be clean, you who carry the vessels of the Lord.
For they carry the vessels of the Lord who receive the souls of neighbors to be led to eternal sanctuaries in the faith of their own conversation.
Let them see within themselves how much they should be cleansed who carry living vessels in the bosom of their own promise to the temple of eternity.
Hence it is commanded by divine voice that in Aaron's breast the rational of judgment be impressed by binding ribbons, as in Exodus, chapter twenty-eight, verse fifteen and following, so that the priestly heart may by no means be possessed by fluid thoughts, but reason alone may constrain it.
Nor should he think anything indiscrete or useless who, established as an example to others, should always show from the gravity of life how much reason he carries in his breast.
In the rational of judgment, which is placed on Aaron's breast, it is commanded that the names of the twelve patriarchs be inscribed. For to carry the inscribed Fathers always in the breast is to think without interruption on the life of the ancients.
Then the priest walks irreproachably when he unceasingly observes the examples of preceding Fathers; when he considers without ceasing the footsteps of the saints, and depresses illicit thoughts, lest he extend the foot of work beyond the boundary of order.
The ruler should always discern good and evil with subtle examination, and carefully consider what things, or to whom, when or how they are suitable; and seek nothing of his own, but consider his advantages as those of neighbors.
From the Pastoral Rule, part two, chapter three: Let the ruler be distinguished in action, so that he may proclaim the way of life to subjects by living well, and the flock, which follows the voice and character of the pastor, may walk better through examples than through words.
It is commanded by divine law that the priest receive in sacrifice the right shoulder and separated, so that not only may his operation be useful, but also singular; and that he may not do right things only among the wicked, but may also transcend well-working subjects, as he surpasses by honor of order, so also by virtue of character.
To the priest in eating is given the breast with the shoulder, so that what is commanded to be taken from the sacrifice, this he may learn to immolate from himself to the author; and not only may he think right things in his breast, but may invite his observers to sublime things by the shoulder of work.
Let the ruler desire nothing of present life, fear nothing; let him despise the blandishments of the world in respect of intimate fear; but let him contemn terrors by consideration of the blandishment of internal sweetness.
From the Pastoral Rule, part two, chapter five: Let the ruler be near to individuals by compassion, suspended above all by contemplation, so that both through the bowels of piety he may transfer into himself the weakness of others, and through the height of speculation he may also transcend himself by desiring invisible things; lest either seeking high things he despise the lowest things of neighbors, or being suited to the lowest things of neighbors, he abandon seeking high things.
Pastors not only desire upward the holy Head of the Church, namely the Lord, by contemplating, but also descend downward to his members by showing mercy.
Hence Moses frequently enters and exits the tabernacle; and he who is seized within into contemplation is pressed outside by the business of the weak. Within he considers God's secrets, outside he bears the burdens of the carnal.
Holy Moses always returns to the tabernacle concerning doubtful matters, and consults God before the ark of the Testament, providing an example without doubt to rulers, that when they doubt outside what to arrange, they should always return to the mind as if to the tabernacle; and as if before the ark of the Testament they should consult the Lord, if concerning those things about which they doubt they seek within themselves the pages of sacred speech.
Truth itself, shown to us through the assumption of our humanity, adheres to prayer on the mountain, exercises miracles in the cities, as the Gospel of Luke, chapter six, verse twelve shows, evidently spreading the way of imitation to good rulers; so that even if they desire sublime things by contemplating, nevertheless they should be mixed by sympathizing with the necessities of the weak.
Then charity rises wonderfully to high things when it draws itself mercifully to the lowest things of neighbors; and to where it benignly descends to the lowest, it strongly returns to the highest.
Those who are set over others by pastoral rule, let them show themselves such that subjects may not blush to reveal their secrets; so that when little ones tolerate the waves of temptations, they may run back to the pastor's mind as if to a mother's bosom. And what they foresee themselves being polluted by the filth of striking guilt, they may wash by the comfort of his exhortation and by tears of prayer.
From the Pastoral Rule, part two, chapter seven: Let the ruler not diminish care of internal things in occupation with external things, not abandoning providence of external things in solicitude for internal things; lest either devoted to external things he fall from intimate things, or occupied with internal things alone, he not expend to neighbors outside what he owes.
Lower things are to be carried out by subjects, higher things to be thought about by rulers, so that indeed care of dust may not block the eye which stands out for providing steps.
All who preside are the head of subjects; and that the feet may be able to take right paths, these without doubt
The head must provide guidance from above, lest the feet grow sluggish in their journey forward, when the head bends downward toward the ground with curved posture. All who are in charge should indeed have external concerns, yet they must not press too heavily upon them.
Priests are rightly forbidden both to shave the head completely and to let the hair grow long, so that they neither utterly cut off fleshly thoughts from the life of their subjects, nor allow them to grow excessively.
The law commands priests that they should keep their heads trimmed, as stated in the book of Ezekiel, chapter forty-four, verse twenty, so that they both provide for the concerns of temporal care as much as necessary, and yet cut them back quickly, lest they grow immoderately.
When therefore bodily life is protected through external care administered, and yet not hindered through moderate intention of heart, the hair on the priest's head is both preserved to cover the skin, and trimmed so it does not close the eyes.
The leader must vigilantly watch that the desire to please people does not strike him; that when he carefully penetrates interior matters and providently administers external ones, he does not seek to be loved by his subjects more than the truth itself; that when supported by good actions he appears estranged from the world, his own self-love does not make him a stranger to the Creator.
He is an enemy of the Redeemer who desires to be loved by the Church in his place through the right works he performs; for he is guilty of adulterous thought if the servant seeks to please the eyes of the bride through whom the Bridegroom sent his gifts.
Good leaders, when they do not know how to love themselves with private affection, consider the freely given word of pure devotion from their subjects as an act of humble obedience.
It is very necessary for leaders that the care of governance be tempered with such art of moderation, that when the mind of subjects is able to perceive certain right things, they may advance into freedom of speech in such a way that freedom does not erupt into pride; lest perhaps when freedom of tongue is granted to them too immoderately, humility of life be lost by them.
Good leaders ought therefore to seek to please people in such a way that by the sweetness of their reputation they draw neighbors into affection for the truth, not that they desire to be loved themselves, but that they make their love like a certain path through which they lead the hearts of hearers to love of the Creator.
For it is difficult that a preacher who is not loved should be gladly heard, no matter how rightly he announces things.
Therefore the one who presides should both strive to be loved, and yet not seek love for himself, lest he be found to resist with hidden tyranny of thought the one whom he is seen to serve through duty. Paul the apostle clearly expresses this when he reveals to us the hidden purpose of his effort, saying, as in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter ten, verse thirty-three: Just as I also please everyone in all things.
Yet he says again, as in Paul's letter to the Galatians, chapter one, verse ten: If I were still pleasing people, I would not be a servant of Christ. Therefore Paul both pleases and does not please, because in that which he desires to please, he seeks not himself but through himself that truth should please people.
A shepherd of souls must discern virtues and vices with watchful care, lest either tenacity occupy the heart and he rejoice at appearing sparing in his distributions; or when something is squandered extravagantly, he glory in appearing generous as though showing mercy; or by pardoning what should have been struck, he drag subjects to eternal punishments; or by striking savagely what has been transgressed, he himself transgress more gravely; or by prematurely anticipating what could have been done rightly and seriously, he trivializes it; or by deferring, he exchanges the merit of good action for worse outcomes.
All that we have mentioned is rightly done by a leader, if inspired by the spirit of heavenly fear and love, he daily meditates studiously on the precepts of sacred Scripture; so that in him the force of care and provident watchfulness toward heavenly life, which the practice of human interaction incessantly destroys, may be restored by the words of divine admonition; and he who is led to oldness through association with worldly people may always be renewed by the aspiration of compunction toward love of the spiritual homeland.

Chapter thirty-four: On the humility of leaders.

Let the leader be discreet in silence, useful in speech, lest he either speak what should be kept silent, or keep silent what should be spoken. For just as careless speech drags into error, so indiscreet silence abandons those who could be instructed in their error.
Let the leader be a companion through humility to those acting well, raised up against the vices of offenders through zeal for justice: so that among the good he places himself above no one, and when the fault of the wicked demands it, he immediately recognizes the authority of his office; that with honor suppressed, he considers himself equal to subjects living well, and toward the perverse he does not fear to exercise the rights of righteousness.
Nature has brought forth all people equal, but by varying order of merits, guilt places some behind others. This very diversity, which arose from vice, is dispensed by divine judgment; so that since not every person can stand equally, one is governed by another.
All who are in charge should consider in themselves not the power of their rank, but the equality of their human condition: they should not rejoice to be set over people, but to be of service to them.
He governs power well who knows both how to hold it and how to fight against it. He governs it well who knows how to be raised up through it above faults, and knows how to compose himself with others in equality along with it.
Yet he rightly dispenses power who carefully knows both to take from it what helps, and to fight what tempts, and to see himself as equal with it to others, and yet to place himself before sinners with zeal for vengeance.
Every preacher should strive to soften the threats of the powerful through reasoning, to lighten the distresses of the oppressed with whatever help he can provide; to oppose patience to those resisting from without, and to show discipline with patience to those growing proud within: so that toward the errors of subjects, gentleness so tempers zeal that it does not weaken the pursuit of justice; so zeal burns toward vengeance, yet in burning does not transgress the boundary of mercy.
The duty of a leader should be to provoke the ungrateful to love through benefits, to preserve each grateful person in love through services: to remain silent about neighbors' evils when he cannot correct them; and to fear that silence regarding whatever can be corrected by speaking means consent.

Chapter thirty-five: How prelates should teach subjects and provide for themselves with discreet circumspection.

Since we have shown above what kind of person a shepherd should be, let us now demonstrate how he should teach. Not one and the same exhortation suits everyone, because not all are bound by an equal quality of character.
For often what benefits some harms others, since generally herbs that nourish these animals kill others, and a gentle whistle calms horses but excites puppies; and medicine that lessens this disease strengthens another: and bread, which strengthens the life of the strong, kills little ones.
According to the quality of hearers, therefore, the speech of teachers must be formed, so that it suits each person individually, and yet never departs from the art of common edification.
For what are the attentive minds of hearers but, so to speak, certain taut strings stretched on a lyre, which the skilled player strikes differently, so as not to produce a discordant song?
And therefore the strings render harmonious melody, because they are struck with one plectrum indeed, but not with one uniform impulse. Every teacher, in order to build up all with the single virtue of charity, from one teaching but not with one and the same exhortation, must touch the hearts of hearers.
For the teacher who is required by the necessity of his position to speak the highest things, is compelled by this same necessity to demonstrate the highest things. For that word more readily penetrates the heart of hearers which the life of the speaker commends, because what he commands by speaking, he helps to come about by showing.
Through the prophet the Lord says, as in the book of Isaiah, chapter forty, verse nine: Ascend a high mountain, you who bring good news to Zion. So that he who engages in heavenly preaching, already abandoning the depths of earthly works, may be seen to stand at the summit of things, and may draw subjects to better things all the more easily, as he cries out about heavenly things through the merit of his life.
Rightly also the priest is commanded to have the ephod made from gold, blue, purple, twice-dyed scarlet, and twisted fine linen; so that it may be shown with how great a diversity of virtues he ought to shine.
In the priest's attire, gold shines before all things, so that in him the understanding of wisdom may principally gleam. To this is joined blue, which shines with sky-like color; so that through all that he penetrates by understanding, he may rise not to base favors but to love of heavenly things; lest while carelessly captured by his own praises, he be emptied even of the very understanding of truth.
To gold and blue, twice-dyed scarlet is joined to purple, so that before the eyes of the inner Judge all the goods of virtues may be adorned from charity, and all things that shine brilliantly before people, these may burn in the sight of the hidden arbiter with the flame of intimate love.
This charity, because it loves both God and neighbor together, shines as if from double dyeing. He who so pants after the vision of the Creator that he neglects care of neighbors, or so pursues care of neighbors that he grows torpid from divine love, because he neglects either one of these, does not know how to have twice-dyed scarlet in the ornament of the ephod.
When a leader prepares himself to speak, let him attend to how much caution he uses in speaking; lest if he is rashly swept away to speaking, the hearts of hearers be struck with the wound of error, and when perhaps he desires to seem wise, he foolishly cuts apart the structure of unity.
In the Gospel, Truth says, as in the Gospel of Mark, chapter nine, verse forty-nine: Have salt in yourselves, and have peace among yourselves. By salt indeed the wisdom of the word is designated. Therefore whoever strives to speak wisely, let him greatly fear lest by his eloquence the unity of hearers be confounded.
Hence Paul says, as in Paul's letter to the Romans, chapter twelve, verse three: Not to be wise beyond what it is proper to be wise, but to be wise unto sobriety. Lest therefore a leader rush carelessly to speaking, Truth itself cries out to disciples what we have already mentioned: Have salt in yourselves, and have peace among yourselves, from the Gospel of Mark, chapter nine, verse forty-nine.
As if figuratively through the priest's attire he says: Join pomegranates to bells; so that through all that you say you may hold the unity of faith with cautious observance.
The priest should always have the voice of preaching, lest he offend the judgment of the heavenly Inspector through silence. The priest entering or leaving the tabernacle dies if sound is not heard from him, because he provokes the anger of the hidden Judge against himself, if he proceeds without the sound of preaching.
Appropriately bells are described as attached to the garments of the high priest. For what else should we understand by the garments of the priest than right works, with the Prophet testifying, who says in Psalm one hundred thirty-one, verse nine: Let your priests be clothed with justice.
Therefore bells adhere to his garments, so that the very works of the priest may cry out the way of life with the sound of the tongue.
We, because we are weak human beings, when we speak to people about God, must first remember what we are, so that from our own weakness we may consider in what order of teaching we should minister to weak brothers.
Let us consider therefore that we are either such as we correct some to be, or we were at some time such, even if by divine grace working we are no longer, so that we may correct them all the more temperately with humble heart, as we more truly recognize ourselves in those whom we amend.
If we priests neither were nor are such as those still are whom we take care to amend, lest perhaps our heart grow proud and fall worse from innocence itself, let us call to mind before our eyes other goods of those whose evils we correct: which if there are none at all, let us have recourse to God's hidden judgments.
Because just as we received by no merits this very good that we have, so also the grace of supernal power can pour into them, so that aroused afterward, they can even surpass the very goods that we received before.
For who would have believed that Saul would surpass Stephen the stoned through the merit of apostleship, he who at his death kept the garments of those stoning him, as in the Acts of the Apostles, chapter seven, verse fifty-seven? By these thoughts therefore the heart must first be humbled, and then finally the iniquity of offenders rebuked.

Chapter thirty-six: On the zeal of pastoral office toward subjects.

All spiritual zeal roasts the soul of the teacher, because he is greatly tormented when he sees any of the weak abandoning eternal things and delighting in temporal things.
For there is no sacrifice to almighty God such as the zeal of souls, as the Psalmist says in Psalm sixty-eight, verse ten: Zeal for your house has consumed me.
Paul the apostle, tormented by zeal for souls, said, as in Paul's second letter to the Corinthians, chapter eleven, verse twenty-nine: Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is made to stumble, and I am not inflamed?
His own heart, which he had set ablaze with zeal for souls, what else had he made but a frying pan, in which he burned with love of virtues against vices? For what was being burned was a frying pan.
For he was burning and cooking, because he was inflamed with bitterness; but he was preparing the food of virtues from his afflicted thought.
What does it mean that the prophet Ezekiel places the frying pan as an iron wall between himself and the city, as in the book of Ezekiel, chapter four, verse three, except that this same strong zeal, which now is at work in the mind of the teacher, on the day of final judgment is a witness between him and the soul for which he has zeal against vices?
So that even if he who is taught is unwilling to hear, the teacher nevertheless is not guilty of the hearer's negligence because of the zeal he has shown.
The prophet places an iron wall between himself and the city, because in the time of vengeance the teacher is fortified from the danger of damnation by that from which now through zeal of guarding the heart he suffers roasting.
How much the roasting of the heart, which is brought about through spiritual zeal, pleases almighty God, is clearly shown when fine flour is commanded to be offered in sacrifice through the law.
For it is written in the book of Leviticus, chapter six, verses twenty-one and twenty-two: In a frying pan sprinkled with oil let it be fried, and let the priest who has succeeded his father by right offer it hot as a most pleasing aroma to the Lord, and it shall be wholly burned on the altar.
Then fine flour is fried in a frying pan, when the pure mind of the just is consumed by the ardor of holy zeal. It is commanded to be sprinkled with oil, that is, charity of mercy to be mixed in, which burns and shines in the sight of almighty God.
Therefore let the mind which is fried in the frying pan be sprinkled with oil, because the strictness of holy zeal must both burn and shine from the virtue of mercy.
For it loves the very one whom it seems to pursue. Therefore it is commanded to be offered hot as a most pleasing aroma to the Lord, because if zeal does not have love, the fine flour which is offered from the frying pan has lost its heat.
It must be greatly noted who is commanded to offer the fine flour, namely the priest who has succeeded his father by right. For that priest succeeds his father by right who demonstrates by his conduct that he is a son of the almighty Lord, and does not differ by baseness from the inner nobility of his works.
It is commanded to be wholly burned on the altar, so that it may become a holocaust. Therefore the fine flour in the frying pan is the pure mind of the just in the affliction of spiritual zeal, which is fried through care for souls; and it is reckoned to be not only a sacrifice but also a holocaust to the Lord.
Let us therefore take an iron frying pan, and place it as an iron wall between us and the city, that is, let us assume strong zeal, so that between us and the soul of our hearer we may afterward find this strong fortification.
For then we shall find this iron wall, if now we hold it firmly, namely by teaching, guarding, persuading, rebuking, soothing, frightening, sometimes acting gently, sometimes indeed even more severely.
Concerning which severity it is rightly added through Ezekiel, from the book of Ezekiel, chapter four, verse three: And you shall make your face firm toward it, and it shall be under siege.
What is it to make the face firm toward Jerusalem depicted on the side, except that to that soul to which the teacher announces the vision of heavenly peace, if he still sees it weakened in its actions, he shows himself by no means more lenient and merciful?
It is written in the book of Sirach, chapter seven, verse twenty-six: Do you have daughters? Guard their bodies, and do not show a cheerful face to them.
For weak souls, devoted to the appetite of the world, are sometimes better preserved through severity: so that a face made firm, that is, hardened through the guardianship of severity from all hope of frivolous leniency, may terrify the inconstant soul, and restrain it from the delight of vices by the force of strictness.
When this is done by a teacher, it is always necessary that sweetness and humility be held in the heart; so that he may love much, and never grow proud against him through exaltation, to whom nevertheless he refuses to reveal his love and humility for his benefit.
The teacher surrounds the soul of the hearer when he announces that snares of temptations can be placed in everything that is done in this life; so that while the mind becomes fearful everywhere, watchful everywhere, the more timid it is, the more vigilantly it may live.
For zeal of righteousness itself, while it agitates the mind with disturbance, soon obscures its vision, so that in commotion it does not see the higher things which it previously saw well when tranquil.
But from there it is more subtly led back to the heights, from where for a time it is beaten back from seeing. For emulation of the right itself after a little while more abundantly opens eternal things in tranquility, which it meanwhile closes through commotion; and from where the mind is disturbed so as not to see, from there it profits to shine more truly for seeing: just as when salve is applied to an ailing eye, light is entirely denied; but from there after a little while it truly receives it, from where it healthfully loses it for a time.
Contemplation is never joined to commotion, nor can a disturbed mind prevail to see that which a tranquil one can scarcely gaze upon; for neither is the ray of the sun perceived when stirred clouds cover the face of heaven; nor does a troubled spring return the image of one looking into it, which a tranquil one shows clearly, because the more its water ripples, the more it obscures in itself the appearance of the likeness.
When the spirit is moved by zeal, care must be taken supremely that anger not dominate the mind in this same thing which is assumed as an instrument of virtue; lest it go before as mistress, but like a maid prepared for service, let it never withdraw from the back of reason.
For then it is more robustly raised up against vices, when it serves subject to reason. However much anger arises from zeal for righteousness, it tears apart an immoderate mind. It immediately scorns to serve reason, and dilates itself all the more shamelessly, as it considers the vice of impatience to be virtue.
It is necessary that before all things, he who is moved by zeal for righteousness attend to this, lest anger pass beyond the dominion of the mind, but considering the time and manner in the vengeance of sin, by more subtly reconsidering, let him restrain the rising disturbance of spirit, suppress impetuosity, and arrange fervent movements under equity, so that he may become a more just avenger of another's wrong, as he previously stood as conqueror of his own.
He who is moved by zeal for righteousness should correct the faults of offenders in such a way that he who corrects first grows through patience, and judges his fervor by transcending it, lest intemperately aroused by the very zeal of righteousness, he wander far from righteousness.

Chapter thirty-seven: That the unworthy and unskilled must not presume to approach pastoral teaching.

There are many shepherds who, while not knowing how to measure themselves, desire to teach what they have not learned, who esteem the weight of teaching all the lighter as they are ignorant of the force of its greatness; so that because untaught and rash they desire to hold the citadel of doctrine, they are repelled from the very door of speech by the audacity of their rashness.
No art is presumed to be taught, unless it is first learned by intent meditation. With what temerity therefore is pastoral teaching undertaken by the unskilled, when the governance of souls is the art of arts?
Who does not know that the wounds of thoughts are more hidden than wounds of the internal organs? And yet often those who have by no means learned spiritual precepts do not fear to profess themselves physicians of the heart, while those who do not know the power of medicines are ashamed to appear as physicians of the flesh.
There are some who within the holy Church through the appearance of governance desire the glory of honor: they desire to be seen as teachers, they covet to surpass others, and as Truth testifies in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-three, verses six and seven, they seek the first places at dinners, the first seats in assemblies: who are all the more unable to worthily minister the office of pastoral care they have undertaken, as they have arrived at the teaching of humility from pride alone.
For the tongue itself is confounded in teaching, when one thing is learned and another is taught. Against unworthy shepherds the Lord complains through the prophet, saying in the book of Hosea, chapter eight, verse four: They have reigned, but not from me: they have been princes, and I knew them not.
For they reign from themselves and not from the will of the supreme ruler, who supported by no virtues, by no means divinely called, but inflamed by their own desire, seize rather than attain the summit of governance.
The inner Judge both advances and does not know useless priests; because those whom he tolerates by permitting, he certainly ignores through the judgment of reprobation. Therefore to some coming to him even after miracles he says, as in the Gospel of Luke, chapter thirteen, verse twenty-seven: Depart from me, workers of iniquity, I do not know who you are.
The ignorance of shepherds is rebuked by the voice of Truth, when it is said through the prophet in the book of Isaiah, chapter fifty-six, verse eleven: The shepherds themselves have not known understanding. Whom again the Lord detests, saying in the book of Jeremiah, chapter two, verse eight: And those holding the law did not know me.
And therefore Truth complains that it is not known by them, and protests that it does not know the rule of those who do not know; because certainly those who do not know the things that are the Lord's are not known by the Lord, with Paul testifying, who says in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter fourteen, verse thirty-eight: But if anyone is ignorant, he shall be ignored.
Often the ignorance of shepherds corresponds to the merits of subjects, because although they do not have the light of knowledge through their own demanding fault, yet by strict judgment it is arranged that through their ignorance even those who follow may stumble.
Hence indeed in the Gospel, Truth itself says in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter fifteen, verse fourteen: If a blind man leads a blind man, both fall into a pit.
Hence the Psalmist, not with the spirit of one wishing but with the mystery of one prophesying, announces, saying in Psalm sixty-eight, verse twenty-four: Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and always bow down their back.
The eyes indeed are those who, placed in the very face of highest honor, have undertaken the duty of providing the way; to whom certainly those who follow behind are called backs. Therefore when the eyes are darkened the back is bent, because when those who lead lose the light of knowledge, certainly those who follow are bent to bearing the burdens of sins.
Each unworthy person would flee from the weight of so great a guilt, if they would weigh with careful ear of heart the sentence of Truth, which says in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter eighteen, verse six: Whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him that a millstone be hung around his neck, and he be drowned in the depth of the sea.
Lest anyone unequal to these things dare to violate sacred governances, and through desire for the summit undertake leadership of perdition.
Hence piously James forbids, saying in the letter of James, chapter three, verse one: Do not become many teachers, my brothers. Hence the very Mediator of God and humanity avoided receiving a kingdom on earth, who transcending even the knowledge and understanding of heavenly spirits reigns in heaven before the ages.
Often by the teaching of adversity the heart is pressed under discipline; which if it breaks out to the summit of governance, is immediately changed into exaltation by the use of glory.
Thus Saul, who previously considering himself unworthy had fled, as soon as he received the reins of the kingdom, swelled up: for desiring to be honored before the people, while unwilling to be reproved publicly, he tore apart the very one who had anointed him in the kingdom, as recounted in the first book of Samuel, chapter ten, verse twenty-two; chapter fifteen, verses seventeen and thirty; in the Acts of the Apostles, chapter thirteen, verse twenty-two; and in the second book of Samuel, chapter eleven, verse three.
Thus David the prophet, pleasing to the Creator's judgment in almost all his actions, as soon as he lacked the weight of pressure, broke out into the swelling of a wound, and became cruelly rigid in the death of a man, who had been weakly dissolute in the desire for a woman: and he who before had known how to mercifully spare the wicked, afterward learned to pant without obstacle of reconsideration even for the death of the good, as in the second book of Samuel, chapter eleven, verse fifteen.
For previously he was unwilling to strike the persecutor he had caught, and afterward with the loss of his toiling army he even killed a devoted soldier. Whom indeed guilt would have carried farther from the number of the elect, had not scourges recalled him to pardon.
Often those who desire to undertake pastoral teaching also propose certain good works in their mind. And although they seek this with the intention of exaltation, yet they contemplate doing great things: and it happens that one thing the intention suppresses in the depths, another the surface of thought shows to the deliberating mind.
For the mind often lies to itself about itself, and pretends to love about good work what it does not love, and not to love about worldly glory what it does love; often the mind desiring to rule becomes fearful about this when it seeks, bold when it arrives.
For striving, it trembles lest it not arrive; but suddenly arriving, it thinks this to which it has arrived due to it by right. And when it has begun to enjoy the office of received principality in a worldly manner, it gladly forgets whatever it thought religiously.
It is necessary that when thought is led outside of use, immediately the eye of the mind be recalled to deeds done: and let each one weigh what he did as a subject, and suddenly he knows if as a prelate he can do the good things he proposed.
He who placed at the bottom has not ceased to be proud by no means can learn humility at the summit. He does not know how to flee praise when it is abundant, who has learned to pant after it when it is lacking.
He by no means can conquer avarice, when he who could not be satisfied with his own things even alone is stretched to the sustenance of many. Therefore from his previously lived life let each one discover himself, lest in the desire for the summit the image of thought deceive him.
Often in the occupation of governance even the practice of good work itself is lost which was held in tranquility, because on a calm sea even the inexperienced rightly steers a ship, but when disturbed by the waves of tempest even the skilled sailor confounds himself.
What is the power of the summit but a tempest of the mind? In which the ship of the heart is always shaken by storms of thoughts, incessantly driven here and there, so that through sudden excesses of mouth and work, as through opposing rocks, it may be broken.
Among these things which we have brought forth, what is to be followed, what to be held, except that he who is strong in virtues should come to governance when compelled, and he who is empty of virtues should not approach even when compelled?
If he utterly resists, let him beware lest binding the received money in a cloth, he be judged for its concealment, as in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-five, verse eighteen. For to bind money in a cloth is to hide received gifts under the leisure of sluggish torpor.
Let each unworthy person, when he desires governance, take heed lest through the example of wicked work in the manner of the Pharisees he become an obstacle to those tending toward entrance to the kingdom, as in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-three, verse thirteen, who, according to the Master's voice, neither enter themselves, nor permit others to enter.
It must also be considered that when an elected bishop takes up the cause of the people, he approaches like a physician to the sick. If therefore passions still live in his work, with what presumption does he hasten to heal the wounded who bears a wound in his face?

Chapter thirty-eight: On the power conferred to bishops of binding and loosing.

Holy preachers who fear the strict judgment of God become judges of souls, and condemn or free others, who feared to be condemned themselves.
Of these indeed now in the Church bishops hold the place. They receive the authority of loosing and binding, who obtain the rank of governance.
Great is the honor of a bishop, but heavy is the weight of this honor. For it is hard that he who does not know how to hold the reins of his own life should become judge of another's life.
It often happens that he himself holds the place of judgment, for whom life by no means agrees with the place. And it is often done that he either condemns the undeserving, or himself bound looses others.
Often in loosing and binding subjects he follows the movements of his own will, not however the merits of the cases. Whence it happens that he deprives himself of this very power of binding and loosing, who exercises it according to his own wills and not according to the merits of subjects.
It often happens that a shepherd is moved by hatred or favor toward any neighbor. But those who in the cases of subjects follow their own hatreds or favors cannot judge worthily about subjects.
Whence it is rightly said through the prophet in the book of Ezekiel, chapter thirteen, verse nineteen: They were killing souls that should not die, and giving life to souls that should not live. For he kills one who will not die who condemns the just, and strives to give life to one who will not live who attempts to absolve the guilty from punishment.
Almighty God, in order to restrain us from pronouncing hasty sentence, when all things are naked and open to his eyes, nevertheless was unwilling to judge the evils of Sodom by hearsay, who said in the book of Genesis, chapter eighteen, verse twenty: I will go down and see, whether they have done altogether according to the cry that has come to me, or whether it is not so, that I may know.
The almighty Lord therefore, knowing all things, why does he as it were doubt before proof, except to propose to us an example of gravity, lest we presume to believe the evils of people before proving them?
What by this example except we are admonished, that we should never be hasty in pronouncing sentence, that we should not rashly judge things not examined, that any evils heard should not move us, that we should not everywhere believe things said without proof?
Causes certainly must be weighed, and then the power of binding and loosing is to be exercised.
It must be seen what the fault is, or what penance has followed after the fault, so that those whom almighty God visits through the grace of compunction, the sentence of the shepherd may absolve. Then the absolution of the one presiding is true, when it follows the judgment of the inner Judge.
Which the resurrection of the four-day dead man well signifies, which indeed demonstrates that first the Lord called the dead man and gave him life saying, as in the Gospel of John, chapter eleven, verse forty-three: Lazarus, come forth; and afterward he who had come forth alive was loosed by the disciples, as it is written: And when he who had been bound with strips had come forth, then Jesus said to his disciples: Loose him and let him go, from the same chapter, verse forty-five.
Namely so that shepherds of the Church ought to remove the punishment from him who was not ashamed to confess what he did.
Under great moderation let shepherds of the Church strive either to loose or to bind. But whether the shepherd binds justly or unjustly, nevertheless the sentence of the shepherd is to be feared by the flock: lest he who is subject, even when perhaps bound unjustly, deserves the sentence of his binding from another fault.
Let each shepherd fear either to absolve or to bind indiscretely. But he who is under the hand of the shepherd, let him fear to be bound justly or unjustly. Nor let him rashly reproach the judgment of his shepherd, lest even if he was bound unjustly, from the very pride of swollen reproach, a fault which was not, may come to be.

Chapter thirty-nine: On shepherds not walking rightly.

There are some who with careful attention scrutinize spiritual precepts, but what they penetrate by understanding they trample by living. Suddenly they teach what they have learned not by work but by meditation, and what they preach in words they attack by conduct.
Whence it happens that when the shepherd walks through precipices, the flock follows to the precipice. Through the prophet the Lord complains against the contemptible knowledge of shepherds, saying in the book of Ezekiel, chapter thirty-four, verses eighteen and nineteen: When you yourselves drank the clearest water, you troubled the rest with your feet, and my sheep fed on what had been trampled by your feet, and they drank what your feet had troubled.
For shepherds drink the clearest water when, rightly understanding the streams of truth, they draw them in, but to trouble this same water with their feet is to corrupt the studies of holy meditation by living badly.
The sheep certainly drink water troubled by the feet of shepherds, when each of the subjects does not follow the words they hear, but imitates only the examples of depravity which they see.
Who when they thirst for the words, because they are perverted through works, as if from corrupted fountains they take mud in their drinks. No one harms more in the Church than he who acting perversely has the name or order of sanctity.
For no one presumes to rebuke this one who is offending, and the fault is vehemently extended into example, when the sinner is honored out of reverence for his order.
He who, led to the appearance of sanctity, destroys others either by word or by example, it would certainly have been better that earthly actions had constrained him to death under external garb, than that sacred offices demonstrated him imitable to others in guilt: because doubtless if he fell alone, a more tolerable punishment of hell would somehow torment him.
Often the care of governance undertaken tears the heart through various things, and each one is found unequal to individual matters, while divided to many things with confused mind.
Whence a certain wise man providently forbids saying in the book of Sirach, chapter eleven, verse ten: Son, let not your undertakings be many; because certainly one is by no means fully gathered in the reason of each work, while the mind is divided through diverse things.
And when it is drawn outward through inordinate care, it is emptied of the solidity of intimate fear. While the mind becomes anxious in the disposition of external things, it is ignorant only of itself, and knows many things while not knowing itself.
For when it entangles itself more than necessary in external things, as if occupied on a journey it forgets where it was heading. So that estranged from the study of its own inquiry, it does not even consider the very losses it suffers, and is ignorant through how many things it transgresses.
King Hezekiah by no means believed himself to sin, when he showed the storerooms of spices to foreigners coming to him, as in the fourth book of Kings, chapter ten, verse thirteen: but he bore the anger of the Judge in the damnation of his offspring to come from this, as in the book of Isaiah, chapter thirty-nine, verse four, because he judged himself to do it lawfully.
Often while many things are abundant, and while things can be done which subjects, because they are done, admire, the spirit elevates itself in thought, and fully provokes in itself the anger of the Judge, although it does not break forth through wicked works outwardly.
For within is he who judges, within is what is judged. When therefore we transgress in the heart, what we do with ourselves is hidden from people, but nevertheless with the Judge himself as witness we sin.
Bringing forth these things we do not reprove the power of governance, but we fortify the weakness of the heart from the appetite for it, lest each of the imperfect dare to seize the summit of governance, and those who standing on level ground totter, place their foot on a precipice.
A blind shepherd is he who is ignorant of the light of heavenly contemplation, as in the book of Leviticus, chapter twenty-one, verse eighteen; who pressed by the shadows of present life, while he by no means sees by loving the coming light, does not know where to extend the step of work.
But the lame leader is he who indeed sees where he ought to go, but through weakness of mind is not able to hold perfectly the way of life which he sees; because while weak habit is not raised up to the state of virtue, where he strives from desire, there the steps do not effectively follow.
But he has a small nose, who is not suitable for holding the measure of discretion. For by the nose we discern odors and stenches. Therefore rightly discretion is expressed through the nose, through which we choose virtues, we reprove offenses.
There are some who, while unwilling to be judged dull, often exercising themselves in certain inquiries more than necessary are deceived from excessive subtlety. Whence it is rightly said: Or with a large and twisted nose, from the same passage.
For a large and twisted nose is immoderate subtlety of discretion, which while it has grown more than is proper, confounds the very rectitude of its action.
He has a broken foot or hand, who is utterly unable to walk the way of the Lord, and vacantly is completely devoid of good actions; so that he does not hold these at least as a lame man with weakness, but exists altogether estranged from these.
But he is hunchbacked, whom the weight of earthly solicitude depresses, so that he never looks to things above, but attends only to those things which are trampled in the lowest places.
Who even if he has at some time heard something from the good of the heavenly homeland, to this indeed weighed down by the weight of perverse habit, does not lift up the face of his heart, because he is not able to raise up the state of thought which the use of earthly solicitude holds bent.
For he is blear-eyed, whose talent indeed shines forth to knowledge of truth, but nevertheless carnal works obscure this. For in blear eyes the pupils are healthy, but with humor flowing down the weakening eyelids thicken.
Because their infusion frequently wears away, even the sharpness of the pupil is impaired. There are some whose sense the operation of carnal life wounds, who were able to see right things subtly through talent, but by the use of depraved actions they grow dim.
Therefore he is blear-eyed, whose sense nature has sharpened, but the depravity of behavior confounds. To whom well through the angel it is said in the book of Revelation, chapter three, verse eighteen: Anoint your eyes with salve, that you may see.
For we anoint our eyes with salve that we may see, when we assist the sharpness of our understanding to know the clarity of true light with the medicine of good operation.
The priest has a white film in his eye, who is not permitted to see the light of truth, because he is blinded by the arrogance of wisdom or justice.
For the black pupil of the eye sees, one bearing a white film sees nothing, because certainly the sense of human thought, if it understands itself foolish and sinful, apprehends the thought of intimate clarity.
But if it attributes to itself the whiteness of justice or wisdom, it excludes itself from the light of heavenly thought, and by no means penetrates the clarity of true light, by which it exalts itself with itself through arrogance.
As it is said of certain ones in Paul's letter to the Romans, chapter one, verse twenty-two: For professing themselves to be wise, they became fools.
He has constant scab in the body, to whom the wantonness of the flesh dominates without cessation in the mind. For in scab the fervor of the internal organs is drawn to the skin.
Through which rightly luxury is designated, because if the temptation of the heart leaps forth even to operation, doubtless the intimate fervor breaks forth even to the scab of the skin: scab wounds the body outwardly, because while pleasure is not restrained in knowledge, it also dominates in action.
For Paul was taking care to wipe away as it were the itching of the skin, when he said in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter ten, verse thirteen: Let no temptation take hold of you, except what is human; as if he openly said: It is indeed human to endure temptation in the heart, but it is demonic to be overcome in the struggle of temptation and in operation.
He has impetigo in the body, whoever is devastated by avarice in the mind, which if not restrained in small things, doubtless dilates without measure.
For impetigo occupies the body without pain, and growing without disgust of the occupied one defiles the beauty of the members; because avarice also ulcerates the captured soul, while as it were it delights; while it presents to thought each thing to be obtained, it kindles to enmities, and does not make pain in the wound, because to the burning spirit from guilt it promises abundance.
The beauty of members is destroyed through impetigo, because also the beauty of other virtues is depraved through avarice; and as it were it roughens the whole body, because it undermines the soul through all vices, with Paul testifying, who says in Paul's first letter to Timothy, chapter six, verse ten: The root of all evils is greed.
He is heavy with weight who does not practice filthiness in work, but nevertheless is weighed down in mind by this continuous thought without moderation: who indeed is by no means carried away even to wicked work, but his spirit is delighted by the pleasure of luxury without any sting of resistance.
For it is the vice of weight, when the humor of the internal organs slips to the private parts, which certainly swell with the annoyance of disgrace.
He is heavy with weight, who flowing down with all thoughts to lasciviousness bears the weight of filthiness in his heart; and although he does not practice wicked things in work, nevertheless he is not torn away from these in mind.
Nor can he rise in the open to the practice of good work, because a heavy weight defiles him in hidden things.
Whoever therefore is subdued by any of these vices, is forbidden to offer bread to the Lord, lest certainly he who is still devastated by his own offenses may not be able to wash away the offenses of others.
When a priest does not do the good things which he speaks, even speech is withdrawn from him, lest he dare to speak what he does not perform, as it is said through the prophet in Psalm forty-nine, verse sixteen: But to the sinner God said: Why do you declare my justices, and take my covenant in your mouth?
Whence also the Psalmist prays saying in Psalm one hundred eighteen, verse forty-three: And do not take away the word of truth utterly from my mouth.
For he weighs that almighty God grants the word of truth to those doing it, and takes it away from those not doing it.
He therefore who asked that this not be taken away from his mouth, what else did he seek than the grace of good operation? As if he openly said: Do not allow me to err from good work, lest while I lose the order of living well, I lose the rectitude of speaking.
Often the teacher who dares to teach what he neglects to do, when he has ceased to speak the good things which he scorned to perform, begins to teach subjects the wicked things which he does, so that by the just judgment of almighty God he who refuses to have good life no longer has even a tongue in good; so that when his mind is inflamed with love of earthly things, he may always speak about earthly things.
Whence in the Gospel Truth says in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twelve, verse thirty-four: Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. A good man brings forth good things from a good treasure, and an evil man brings forth evil things from an evil treasure, from the Gospel of Luke, chapter six, verse forty-five. Hence also John says in John's first letter, chapter four, verse five: They are of the world, therefore they speak of the world.

Chapter forty: On bishops who willingly accept gifts for ordinations.

Some bishops are accustomed to turn the gift of the received Spirit to the use of business, and to decline the signs of miracles to the service of avarice.
Hence it is that Simon, desiring miracles performed through the laying on of hands, wished to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit with money, namely that he might sell worse what he had bought badly, as in the Acts of the Apostles, chapter eight, verse eighteen.
Our Redeemer with a whip made from cords drove the crowds out of the temple, overturned the chairs of those selling doves, as in the Gospel of John, chapter two, verse fifteen. For to sell doves is to give the laying on of hands, by which the Spirit is received, not for the merit of life, but for a reward.
There are some who indeed do not accept rewards of money from ordination, and yet bestow sacred orders for human favor, and from this same generosity seek only the repayment of praise.
These doubtless do not give freely what was freely received; because from the bestowed office of sanctity they seek the coin of favor.
When the prophet Isaiah described the just man, he said in the book of Isaiah, chapter three, verse fifteen: Who shakes his hands from every gift. For he does not say: Who shakes his hands from a gift, but he added from every: because one thing is a gift from service, another a gift from the hand, another a gift from the tongue.
A gift from service is subjection unduly bestowed; a gift from the hand is money; a gift from the tongue is favor.
Therefore he who bestows sacred orders then shakes his hands from every gift, when in divine matters he seeks not only no money whatsoever, but also not human favor.
It often happens that whoever scorns to accept gold or bodily goods from people, but because he does not accept these things, seeks to receive greater praises from them.
And perhaps he does not judge that he has received a gift, because he refuses to accept bodily goods. As was said above, sometimes a gift is extended from the hand, sometimes indeed from the mouth, for he who gives a coin, has given a gift from the hand; but he who bestows a word of praise, has brought forth a gift from the mouth.
Often a priest, even if he refuses to accept external gifts, which perhaps suit earthly necessity, for the laying on of hands, it is more what he desires to be repaid to him, when desiring to be praised beyond merit, he seeks a gift from the mouth.

Chapter forty-one: On those who can be of service in governance, but flee this same office through their own quietude.

There are some who receive extraordinary gifts of virtues, and are exalted by great gifts for the exercise of others; who are pure in the study of chastity, strong in the vigor of abstinence, filled with the feasts of doctrine, humble in the long-suffering of patience, raised up in the fortitude of authority, kind in the grace of piety, strict in the severity of justice.
Who doubtless if when called they refuse to undertake the summit of governances, often take away from themselves the very gifts, which they received not only for themselves, but also for others.
And when they think of their own and not others' gains, they deprive themselves of the very goods, which they desire to have privately.
To the disciples in the Gospel, Truth says in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter five, verse fifteen: A city set on a mountain cannot be hidden, nor do they light a lamp and put it under a bushel, but on a lampstand, that it may give light to all who are in the house.
Hence he says to Peter in the Gospel of John, chapter fifteen, verses sixteen and seventeen: Simon son of John, do you love me? Who when he had immediately responded that he loved, heard: If you love me, feed my sheep.
If therefore the testimony of love is the care of feeding, whoever strong in virtues refuses to feed the flock of God, is proved not to love the supreme shepherd.
If we take care of our own as well as our neighbor's concerns, we fortify as it were both feet through footwear. But he who thinking of his own usefulness neglects neighbors, as it were loses the footwear of one foot with disgrace.
There are some who enriched with great gifts, while they burn with the studies of contemplation alone, refuse to serve the usefulness of neighbors in preaching, love the secret of quietude, desire the withdrawal of speculation.
Concerning which if they are strictly judged, they are without doubt guilty of as many things as they could have been of use coming to public life.
With what mind does he who would shine forth to be of use to neighbors place his own secret before the usefulness of others, when the very Only-Begotten of the supreme Father, in order to be of use to many, came forth from the bosom of the Father to our public life?
There are some who flee from humility alone, lest they be preferred to those to whom they judge themselves unequal. Whose humility indeed, if it is girded with other virtues too, is then true before the eyes of God, when it is not obstinate in refusing this which is commanded to be undertaken usefully.
For he is not truly humble who understands the will of the heavenly nod that he ought to preside, and yet scorns to preside. Subject to divine dispositions, and alien from the vice of obstinacy, when the summit of governance is commanded to him, if he has already been anticipated by gifts, by which he may also be of use to others, both from the heart he ought to flee, and unwillingly to obey.

Chapter forty-two: On good subjects established under pastoral governance.

Subjects must be admonished not to rashly judge the life of their superiors, if perhaps they see them doing something reprehensibly, lest from where they rightly rebuke evils, from there through the impulse of exaltation they be plunged into deeper things.
Subjects must be admonished that when they consider the faults of superiors, they should not become bolder against them, but thus, if certain things are very wicked of them, let them judge among themselves, so that nevertheless constrained by divine fear, they do not refuse to bear under them the yoke of reverence.
Which we better show, if we bring forth the deed of David into the middle. For Saul the persecutor, when he had entered a cave to relieve himself, David was there with his men, who had already for so long a time endured the evils of his persecution.
And when his men were urging him to strike Saul, he broke them with responses, because he ought not to lay a hand on the anointed of the Lord. Yet he secretly arose, and cut off the edge of his cloak, as in the first book of Samuel, chapter twenty-four, verse four.
What is designated by Saul except evil leaders, what by David except good subjects? Therefore for Saul to purge his belly is for wicked superiors to extend malice conceived in the heart even to works of miserable odor, and to show by executing things thought harmful in themselves through external deeds.
For David fears to strike Saul, because the pious minds of subjects abstaining from all plague of detraction, strike the life of superiors with no sword of the tongue, even when they reprove imperfection.
Good subjects, when through weakness they can scarcely abstain, so that they speak certain extreme and external evils of superiors, but nevertheless humbly, as it were silently cut the edge of the cloak.
Because indeed while they at least innocently and secretly derogate the dignity placed over them, they as it were defile the garment of the King placed above; but nevertheless they return to themselves, and most vehemently reprove themselves even for the slightest tearing of a word.
Whence well also it is written there in the same chapter, verse six: After this David struck his heart, because he had cut off the edge of Saul's cloak.
The deeds of superiors are not to be struck with the sword of the mouth, even when they are judged to be rightly reprehended. But if at any time the tongue slips against them even in the smallest things, it is necessary that through the affliction of penance the heart be pressed; so that it may return to itself, and when it has offended against the power placed over it, may dread against itself the judgment of him from whom the one placed over it comes.
For when we offend against superiors, we oppose the ordinance of him who placed them over us. Whence Moses also, when he had recognized the people complaining against himself and Aaron, said in the book of Exodus, chapter sixteen, verse eight: For what are we? Neither is your murmuring against us, but against the Lord.
Benevolent subjects must be admonished, that they so rejoice with the goods of others, that they may also desire to have their own. That they so praise the deeds of neighbors with love, that they may also multiply them by imitating, lest if in this stadium of present life they stand as devoted supporters but lazy spectators to another's contest, there after the contest they remain without reward, where now in the contest they do not labor; and then afflicted they may look upon their palms in whose labors now they persist idle.
We sin greatly, if we do not love the good deeds done by others. But we do nothing of reward, if those things which we love, as much as we can, we do not imitate.
It must be said to benevolent subjects, that if they by no means hasten to imitate the good things which praising they approve, thus the holiness of virtues pleases them, as the vanity of theatrical arts pleases foolish spectators.
For they extol the deeds of charioteers and actors with favors, and yet they do not desire to be such as they see those to be whom they praise. They admire that they have done pleasing things, but nevertheless they avoid pleasing similarly.
It must be said to benevolent subjects, that when they behold the deeds of neighbors, let them return to their own heart, and not presume about the actions of others, lest they praise good things and refuse to do them, for more severely must those be struck with final vengeance to whom that which they were unwilling to imitate has pleased.

Chapter 43: On Envious or Defiant Subordinates

Subordinates under pastoral authority, when they become greatly puffed up about themselves, disdain to reproach others, and esteem everything they do as uniquely superior. Therefore, the works of the defiant must be carefully examined by their corrector, so that they may be shown that in the very things that please them, they displease God.
We better correct the defiant when we show them that what they believed they did well was done badly, and that from what they thought brought glory, useful shame follows instead. Sometimes subordinates, when they do not recognize that they are committing the vice of defiance, come more quickly to correction if they are confronted with another more obvious fault sought from the side, so that from what they cannot defend, they may recognize that they are wrongly holding to what they do defend.
When Paul saw the Corinthians defiantly puffed up against one another, so that one would say he belonged to Apollo, another to Paul, another to Cephas, and another to Christ, he brought into their midst the charge of incest, which had been committed among them and remained uncorrected, saying, as we read in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter five, verses one and two: It is heard that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not even among the gentiles, such that someone should have his father's wife. And you are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he who has done this deed might be taken away from among you.
As if he were openly saying: Why do you defiantly claim to belong to this one or that one, when through your negligent dissolution you show yourselves to belong to no one? Envious subordinates must be warned to consider how great is the blindness of those who fail at another's progress and waste away at another's exaltation.
How great is the unhappiness of those who become worse through their neighbor's improvement, and while they look upon the increases of another's prosperity, they die anxiously afflicted within themselves by the plague of their own heart. What is more unhappy than the envious, whom, while observed happiness affects them, punishment renders more wicked?
But if they loved the good things of others which they cannot have, they would have made them their own. Certainly the good things of others are ours when, even if we cannot imitate them, we love them in others; and whatever is loved in us becomes the possession of those who love. From this, therefore, let the envious consider how great a virtue charity is, which makes the works of another's labor our own without labor.
While the envious do not guard themselves at all from malice, they are plunged into the ancient wickedness of the cunning enemy. For it is written of him in the book of Wisdom, chapter two, verse twenty-four: Through the envy of the devil, death entered into the world. Because he himself lost heaven, he envied this created man, and being lost, he still multiplied his own damnation by destroying others.
Let the envious recognize to how many falls of growing ruin they are subject, because while they do not cast malice from their heart, they roll down to open wickedness in their deeds. For unless Cain had envied his brother's accepted sacrifice, he would never have arrived at extinguishing his life. Whence it is written in Genesis, chapter four, verse four: And the Lord looked upon Abel and his gifts, but upon Cain and his offerings he did not look. And Cain was exceedingly angry, and his countenance fell.
Thus malice over the sacrifice became the seed of fratricide. For he cut off the one whom he grieved to be better than himself, so that he would not exist at all. It must be said to the envious that while they consume themselves with this inner plague, they also destroy whatever other good they seem to have in themselves. Whence it is written in the book of Proverbs, chapter fourteen, verse thirty: The life of the flesh is the health of the heart; envy is the rottenness of the bones.
Through the vice of malice, even those things that seem strong to human eyes perish before the eyes of God. For bones to rot through envy is for even certain strong things to perish. He is truly a humble subordinate in good things who is not a defender in evil things.
For when a subordinate is confronted about his evils and becomes inflamed against the words of the one confronting him, when he hesitates quasi-humbly about his good things, he desires to be adorned through the voice of humility, not to be taught.

Chapter 44: On Clerics and Their Required Character

A cleric must be admonished to live in such a way that he provides a good example of his life to secular people. If anything in a cleric is justly blamed, the very estimation of our religion is burdened by his fault.
Let clerics learn to fulfill what is commanded by their elders, to submit humbly to their commands, so that neither subjection crushes them nor a higher position lifts them up. Let clerics learn how to order their interior selves through humility and obedience before the eyes of the hidden judge, so that they may not be punished as reprobates, but may receive eternal rewards with the elect.
Clerics must be warned to live so much more carefully around themselves as the care of others does not entangle them. It must be said to clerics that they should not rashly judge the life of their superiors, if perhaps they see them doing something blameworthy, lest from where they rightly condemn evils, they should be plunged into deeper things through the impulse of pride.
Clerics must be warned that when they consider the faults of their superiors, they should so judge their wrongs within themselves that nevertheless, bound by divine fear, they do not refuse to bear the yoke of reverence under them; because the deeds of superiors must not be struck with the sword of the mouth, even when they are judged rightly to be blamed.
For many clerics, nothing but harsh rebuke restrains them from the vice of shamelessness, because while they do not know themselves to be at fault, it is necessary that they be rebuked by many. For modest clerics, moderate exhortation usually leads them to better things, because for their conversion it is sufficient that a teacher brings their evils gently to their memory.
Greater progress is brought to modest clerics if what is blamed in them is touched from the side, as if with the hand of a soothing tongue. We more suitably bring back faint-hearted clerics to the path of right action if we seek out from the side certain of their good things, so that while we correct them by reproving some things, we praise them by embracing others, so that heard praise may nourish their tenderness, which rebuked fault chastises.
We often make more useful progress with clerics if we also recall their good deeds. And if any things have been done by them in a disorderly way, we do not rebuke them as already committed, but we forbid them as if they still should not be committed.
Many clerics, while they fear to be caught in their fault, always seek wicked defenses and are always agitated by fearful suspicions. For nothing is safer for defense than purity, nothing easier for speaking than truth. For while one is compelled to protect his deceit, the heart is wearied with hard labor.
Often clerics caught in fault, while they refuse to be known for what they are, hide themselves under the veil of deceit, and strive to excuse what they have sinned, and what is now openly seen. It often happens that one who strives to correct the faults of wicked clerics, seduced by the mists of sprinkled falsehood, sees that he has almost lost what he already held as certain about them.
Through the prophet it is said in the book of Isaiah, chapter thirty-four, verse fifteen: There the hedgehog had its den. By the name of hedgehog is designated the duplicity of an impure mind defending itself craftily. For when a hedgehog is seized, its head is seen, its feet are visible, and its whole body is observed; but as soon as it has been seized, it gathers itself into a sphere, withdraws its feet inward, hides its head, and within the holder's hands all that was seen as a whole before is lost all at once.
When impure minds are caught in their excesses, it is as if the head of the hedgehog is seen, because it is visible by what beginning the sinner approached his fault. The feet of the hedgehog are observed, because it is known by what tracks the wickedness was perpetrated, and yet when excuses are suddenly brought forth, the impure mind draws its feet inward, because it hides all the traces of its iniquity.
It withdraws its head, because through wondrous defenses it does not even show that it began any evil. The hedgehog remains like a sphere in the hand of the holder, because the one who corrects suddenly loses all that he had already known, and holds the sinner wrapped within his conscience; and he who had already seen the whole by apprehending it, deceived by the evasion of wicked defense, is equally ignorant of the whole.
The hedgehog has its den among the reprobate, because the duplicity of the malicious mind, gathering itself within itself, hides in the darkness of defense. Through the prophet Habakkuk it is said: Behold, the great and terrible day of the Lord comes upon all fortified cities and upon all high corners.
For what is expressed by fortified cities except suspicious minds, always surrounded by deceitful defense, which whenever their fault is corrected, do not admit the javelins of truth to themselves? What is signified by high cornersfor there is always a double wall in cornersexcept impure hearts, which while they flee the simplicity of truth, are in some way folded back upon themselves by the perversity of duplicity?
For the wrath of the final judgment destroys human hearts both closed by defenses against truth and dissolves those wrapped in duplicities. Then fortified cities fall, because minds impenetrable to God will be condemned. Then high corners collapse, because hearts that raise themselves through the prudence of impurity are cast down by the sentence of justice.

Chapter 45: On the Life and Conduct of Monks

All monks, leaving the world, do not cease to punish by weeping the things they have sinned. They affect themselves with grave sorrow, because having been cast far from the face of the Creator, they are not yet in the joys of the eternal homeland. Of whose heart it is well said through Solomon in the book of Proverbs, chapter fourteen, verse ten: The heart that knows the bitterness of its soul, no stranger will be mixed in its joy.
The hearts of good monks know their bitterness, because they understand the hardship of exile by which they are torn while cast down; and they sense how tranquil are the things they have lost, how confused are those things into which they have fallen. Monks who are in bitterness of soul thoroughly desire to die to the world, so that just as they themselves seek nothing in the world, so now they may be held by no obligation from the world.
It often happens that a monk no longer holds the world in his mind, but nevertheless the world binds the monk with certain occupations, and he himself is indeed already dead to the world, but the world still lives for him. For the world still desires him while it strives to seize him, intent on other things, in its actions.
The apostle Paul, when he perfectly despised the world and saw himself made such that this world could no longer desire him at all, with the bonds of this life broken, says freely in Paul's letter to the Galatians, chapter six, verse fourteen: The world is crucified to me, and I to the world. For the world had been crucified to him, because he did not love it, already dead to his heart. But he had also crucified himself to the world, because he strove to show himself to it such that he could not be desired by it as if he were dead.
If a dead person and a living person are in one place, even if the dead does not see the living, the living nevertheless sees the dead; but if both are dead, neither sees the other at all. Thus one who no longer loves the world, but nevertheless is loved by it even unwillingly, even if he like a dead man does not see the world, the world, not yet dead, still sees him.
But if he neither holds the world in love, nor is he again held by the world's love, they are mutually extinct to each other; because while neither seeks the other, the dead does not attend to the dead. Paul, the vessel of election, because he neither sought the world's glory, nor was he himself sought by the world's glory, glories that both he is crucified to the world and the world to him.
Because many monks desire this, but nevertheless do not rise in every way to the summit of extinction, they rightly say groaning, as found in the book of Job, chapter three, verse twenty: Why is light given to the miserable, and life to those who are in bitterness of soul? When the glory of this world is granted to the sad and groaning, they affect themselves with the punishment of strongest fear; because even if they themselves do not hold the world, they nevertheless fear that they are still such as to be held by the world, because unless they lived to it even a little, it would without doubt not love them for its use.
For the sea retains living bodies in itself, but it immediately expels dead ones outside itself. Sometimes monks therefore scarcely arrive at their conceived desires, so that with intervening delay they may be expanded to the same desires with relaxed bosom of mind; and those things which perhaps could be diminished when fulfilled, it is done by great disposition that repulsed they may grow more abundantly.
Many monks so desire to be mortified to the present age that they may now contemplate perfectly, if it were permitted, the face of their Creator. But their desire is deferred so that it may profit; and it is nourished in the bosom of its delay so that it may grow. In the Song of Songs, the bride, gasping for the face of her bridegroom, cries out in chapter three, verse one: In my bed by night I sought him whom my soul loves; I sought him and did not find him.
The bridegroom hides himself when he is sought, so that not being found he may be sought more ardently; and the seeking bride is delayed from finding, so that made more capacious by her delay, she may at some time find more abundantly what she sought. When spiritual monks fully desire their mortification, the closer they become to the end, the more ardent they show themselves in work.
Therefore they do not fail by laboring, but rather grow in the practice of labor; for the closer they consider the rewards to be, the more delightfully they sweat in the work. The apostle Paul, as if to certain monks seeking the hidden treasure of the eternal homeland, says in the letter to the Hebrews, chapter ten, verse twenty-five: Not deserting our gathering, as is the custom of some, but consoling, and so much more as you see the day approaching.
For to console one who labors is to persist equally in labor, because the relief of labor is the sight of one who labors together. Many monks, because they are lulled to sleep not by torpor but by virtue from the works of the world, sleep more laboriously than they could keep watch; because in deserting and overcoming the actions of this age, they fight daily against themselves in robust conflict, lest the mind grow torpid through negligence, lest subdued by idleness it grow cold toward impure desires, lest it burn too much in the good desires themselves beyond what is just, lest under the appearance of discretion, sparing itself, it languish from perfection.
A good monk completely withdraws himself from the restless concupiscence of this world and deserts the noise of earthly actions, and through the pursuit of quiet, his mind intent on virtues sleeps as if watching. Each monk is scarcely brought to contemplate internal things unless he is carefully withdrawn from those things which entangle him externally.
For through itself Truth says in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter six, verse twenty-four: No one can serve two masters. Hence Paul says in Paul's second letter to Timothy, chapter two, verse four: No one serving as a soldier for God entangles himself in secular business, so that he may please him to whom he has proved himself. Through the prophet the Lord admonishes, saying in Psalm forty-five, verse eleven: Be still and see that I am God. Because clearly internal knowledge is not discerned at all unless one ceases from external entanglement.

Chapter 46: On Monastic Humility and Work

A monk must be admonished to always look carefully at the reverence of his habit in his action, in his speech, in his thought, and to perfectly abandon the things that are of the world, and what he shows to human eyes by his habit, this he should display before the eyes of God by his character.
The devout minds of monks, when the administration of external cares is absent, do not seek to be implicated in these external things. But even when they are present, they bear them heavily, because through the care of external things they fear to go out from themselves. All monks who refuse to be scattered in external cares are simple in thought and consist in the dwelling of their conscience.
Hence it is written of Jacob in Genesis, chapter twenty-five, verse twenty-seven: But Jacob was a simple man dwelling in tents. To dwell in tents is to restrain oneself within the secrets of the mind, and in no way to dissipate oneself externally through desires. Elect monks, when transitory prosperity smiles upon them, dissimulate the favor of the world as if not knowing it, and with strong step inwardly trample that by which they are externally lifted up.
Elect monks resound with no clamors of wicked action, are seized by no turbulent appetite of temporal desires, but certainly they refuse to be occupied immoderately with the necessary cares of present life. Often monks doing good things still feel paternal scourges, so that they may come to their inheritance all the more perfect, as discipline striking them piously purges them daily even from the smallest things.

Chapter 47: On Lax Monastic Conduct

There are some who after a lost life return to themselves, and with conscience accusing them, they abandon perverse paths, they change their works, they contradict their ancient depravity, they flee earthly actions, they pursue heavenly desires; but before they are strengthened in these same holy desires, through torpor of mind they return to those things which they had begun to judge, and they run back to the evils which they had determined to flee.
It often happens that for the benefit of many, even holy men serve in external actions and are occupied with the governance of peoples; weak men observing this, and seeking to imitate through ancient pride still present, insert themselves into external actions; but inasmuch as they come to them not instructed in spiritual disciplines, so much do they carry them out carnally.
Unless the heart first grows strong in heavenly desires through long study and prolonged conduct, when it is poured back to doing external things, it is uprooted from every state of good work. There are some who after perverse paths desire to pursue holy ways; but before good desires are strengthened in them, as we said, a certain prosperity of the present age receives them, which implicates them in external matters, and their mind, while it withdraws from the warmth of intimate love, is as if extinguished from cold, and whatever seemed to appear in them of the flower of virtues, it kills.
If perhaps a weak and lukewarm monk begins to do something good, before he grows strong in it through length of time, he slips down to external things, and perversely abandons what he seemed to have rightly begun. For the spirit grows very cold in earthly actions, if it has not yet been solidified through interior gifts.
It is very necessary that greater places or external works, which will be profitable for human necessities, be undertaken to be exercised by those who know how to judge these things and press them down under themselves from interior virtue. When any weak person is drawn back either to a place of governance or to doing external things, by which he is led as if outside himself, he is uprooted; because also a tree that does not first send roots into the deep is more quickly laid low by the force of winds if it raises itself to a high summit; and it falls more quickly to the depths, the higher it has grown in the air without roots.
Sometimes not cold but heat dries up a flourishing vineyard. And when it is touched by immoderate heat, with the flower scattered, the grape cluster withers. And it often happens that those who do not come to good works with right intention, when they see themselves pleasing men, are more vehemently inflamed to exercise these same works, they anxiously strive to do things that will please human eyes, and they burn hot as if in holy study.
What therefore happens to these except heat in the flower, whom the appetite for human praise has made strangers to fruit? In the Song of Songs through Solomon it is said in chapter seven, verse twelve: Let us rise early to the vineyards, let us see if the vineyard has flourished, if the flowers bring forth fruits. For vineyards flourish when the minds of the faithful propose good works. But they do not bear fruit if, conquered by some errors, they are weakened from what they proposed.
Therefore it is not to be considered whether vineyards flourish, but whether the flowers grow strong to the birth of fruits; because it is no wonder if someone begins good things, but it is very wonderful if he perseveres in good work with right intention. Whence it often happens that if right intention is not held in good work, even this work itself, which is believed to be good, is lost.
When an olive tree is in flower, if it is touched by immoderate mist, it is emptied of the fullness of fruits. And whenever those beginning good works start to be praised by onlookers and to delight in their praises, a fog of understanding occurs in thought, so that they can no longer discern with what intention they do anything, and they lose the fruit of the work, as if from a mist of favor.
We have often seen certain monks who had abandoned the earthly things they possessed, and who sought nothing transitory, were mixed up in no quarrels for this life. And when each one showed this in himself, he brought forth a flower like an olive tree. But when certain of such people again began to seek the glory of the world which they had despised, and to gape insatiably after earthly things which they seemed to have spurned, to devote themselves to quarrels, to seek out injuries to neighbors, certainly the olive tree cast away the flower which it had put forth, because it did not bring the rudiments of good study to perfect works.
It must be known most importantly because this is accustomed to happen to monks who do not follow God with pure and simple study, what is written in the book of blessed Job, chapter fifteen, verse thirty-four: The congregation of the hypocrite is barren. For they would not lose begun good things if they had not been hypocrites. But hypocrites also gather good works, but their very gathering is sterile; because through what they do, they do not desire to receive fruit in eternal retribution.
They seem fruitful and green in their works to human eyes, but in the sight of the hidden Judge they appear unfruitful and dry.

Chapter 48: On Monks Entangling Themselves in Worldly Affairs

The mind of a monk is in no way lifted up to higher things if it is continuously occupied in the lowest things by the tumults of cares. For what does an occupied mind obtain concerning God, when even while vacant it labors to apprehend something of him? But it is well said through the Psalmist in Psalm forty-five, verse eleven: Be still and see that I am God, because he who neglects to be still for God hides from himself by his own judgment the light of his vision.
Monks who are occupied with temporal things then arrange external things well when they carefully flee to interior things, when they in no way love the noise of disturbances outside, but rest within themselves in the bosom of tranquility. Depraved minds of monks do not cease to turn over the tumults of temporal things within themselves, even when they are free.
For they keep painted in thought what they love, and although they do nothing externally, they nevertheless labor within themselves under the weight of restless rest. If the administration of these same things is offered to them, they completely desert themselves; and they follow these fleeting temporal things through the steps of thoughts.
It is written in the book of Genesis, chapter twenty-five, verse twenty-seven: Esau became skilled in hunting, and a farmer. For what is figured by the hunting of Esau except the life of those monks who, poured out in exterior pleasures, follow carnal actions? Who is also described as being a farmer, because lovers of this age so much more cultivate exterior things as they leave their interior things uncultivated.
Things that favor externally must be dissimulated by monks, things that resound internally must be repressed, things that involve them as if necessary must be avoided; and yet in all these things the scourges of strict examination must still be feared. Often our very perfection is not without fault, unless the severe Judge mercifully weighs it in the subtle balance of examination.
For intent on secular cares, we become so much more insensible within as we seem more studious toward those things which are outside. By the use of earthly care, the spirit grows hard from heavenly desire; and while by its very use it is made hard through the action of the world, it cannot be softened toward those things which pertain to the charity of God.
The holy Church says of her weakening members in the Song of Songs, chapter one, verse five: They made me keeper of the vineyards, but my own vineyard I have not kept. For our vineyards are our actions, which we cultivate by the use of daily labor. But placed as keepers in the vineyards, we scarcely keep our own vineyard, because while we are implicated in foreign thoughts, we neglect the ministry of our action.

Chapter 49: On Monastic Lukewarmness

Some monks indeed flee the actions of the world, but are exercised in no virtues. These certainly sleep by torpor, not by study; and therefore they do not perceive interior things, because they placed their head not on a stone but on earth.
It often happens to monks that the more securely they cease from external actions, the more widely they heap up the noise of impure thought in themselves through idleness. Whence under the likeness of Judea, through the prophet the soul growing torpid in idleness is lamented when it is said in Lamentations, chapter one, verse seven: Her enemies saw her and mocked at her sabbaths. By the precept of the law one ceases from external work on the sabbath. Therefore enemies seeing the sabbaths mock, when malign spirits drag the very leisures of vacation to illicit thoughts, so that each soul, the more it is believed to serve God removed from external actions, so much more it serves their tyranny by thinking illicit things.
Through the most wise Solomon it is said in Proverbs, chapter eighteen, verse nine: He who is soft and dissolute in his work is brother to him who destroys his work. The hand of the strong worker does not lift up begun good things to perfection if the very slackness of working fights against what has been worked. A monk who does not strictly carry out begun good things imitates the hand of the destroyer through the dissolution of negligence.
To the Church of Sardis it is said by the angel in the book of Revelation, chapter three, verse two: Be watchful and strengthen the remaining things that were about to die, for I do not find your works full before my God. Because therefore his works were not found full before God, he predicted that the remaining things also which had been done were about to die. If what is of death in us is not kindled to life, this also is extinguished which is held as if still living. In this world the human soul is like a ship ascending against the blow of a river: it is not permitted to stand in one place, because it slips back to the depths unless it strives toward the heights.
This concludes the second book of Sentences.