The Two Letters of Mapinius of Reims

First letter to Saint Nicetius, at the Council of Toul held in the year 549.

To the holy and most blessed brother in Christ, Nicetius, from Pope Mappinius, bishop.
The teaching of the gospel reading testifies that a kingdom divided against itself cannot stand (Matthew twelve).
If this is rightly believed about those who love the world and remain in earthly desire, it is even more true for priests, if they are divided by discordant wishes and pursuits.
How can we confidently offer prayers to our Creator, who commanded us to live united as the body of His deity, if we separate ourselves from mutual love?
As the divine word teaches, it is fitting for us to strive so that a brother helping a brother can stand like a fortified and strong city on an unshakable foundation; namely, that we may all equally share in a brother's sorrows with compassion and support each other with mutual efforts.
For this reason, most beloved and dearly respected lord and brother, we inform you that we received a letter from our lord, King Theodebald, instructing us to be present in the city of Toul on the first day of June, without stating any reason for the summons.
In response, we indicated that we should not go there, as we were unaware of the reason and condition.
In repeated writings, we informed your holiness that while correcting some of the Franks for the zeal of divine fear and removing them from ecclesiastical communion for incestuous conditions, you endure various scandals and anxieties.
We greatly lament that you did not inform us of this through your report, whether they are condemned by canonical reading or corrected for minor offenses with pastoral diligence.
Although we know you cannot discover anything new about these matters that the ancient wisdom of the Fathers could not find, it seems absurd that we should accept those who according to the order of the canons are rejected by you with ecclesiastical severity.

For we know that if we do this knowingly, we are involved in others' crimes; if unknowingly, we are not subject to guilt. Therefore, we greet you with the proper love and also advise you to strive to make us share in all your troubles and your prosperities.
For we, through our head, which is Christ, are not torn away from your anxiety by any adversity, nor separated from your love by any hardship. On this matter, if we are not presumptuous, we presume to indicate.
It was fitting that your consolation, for such conditions rather than for royal calling, should have been our task; because similarly, if something like this had happened to us, which we think might happen in the future, we would have immediately sent a letter to your fraternity, so that we might see each other at an appropriate time or place.
Although it is both suitable and pleasing for us to obey royal commands in good matters, yet it is no less suitable to follow your letters if they are directed by the zeal of love, not by the disdain of contempt; because your bitterness cannot be our sweetness; nor will your rejection exist without our demotion; and the honor owed to you cannot be recognized by us from afar.
And would that, as we have said before, driven by love and running through the page, you had decided to reveal to us the trouble of your minds! We would have known whether we sympathize with your troubles or delight in them; for as you know, when the divine is silent, only humanity can understand through a speaking man.
However, may your perfection more fully know this: if the repeated letters of the lord king had reached us before the fifth or sixth day of the Kalends of June, on the mentioned day you would have had the presence of our humility in the appointed place.

Letter Two. To Villicus, Bishop of Metz

To his lord Villicus the pope from Mappinius the bishop.
We unanimously proclaim you as happy and blessed, most blessed father, to whom divine compassion has granted such understanding and kindness that you are proven to live with unique perfection. Although we read that this was said by the Lord to Saint Peter, "Feed my sheep," this statement applies to all who perform the priestly office. But you, surpassing all others with singular sweetness, not only feed the sheep entrusted to you but also continually nourish the priests of other flocks with your honeyed perfection and abundance of delights. The one who examines hearts and minds is a witness that this is written to you not out of flattery, but as a truthful assertion from us. If our Creator and Redeemer extends your years to sixty, as we pray, you will be foremost among all and preferred to the rest of the priests. All who benefit from the instruction of your life would grieve your absence and lament living after you. Therefore, greeting you with due love and praying diligently, we ask that you do not cease to implore the mercy of the merciful Lord for us with constant narration and praises. We also request that your charity inform us how many coins we should send to buy pigs in those parts, as it is clear to us that the gift given by you will be considered a favor if this benefit is arranged by you.

