
by Unknown
Patrologia Latina Volume 


The Eight Principal Vices That Attack Humanity

There are eight principal vices that attack the human race. The first is gastrimargia, which means gluttony of the belly. The second is fornication. The third is philargyria, that is, avarice or love of money. The fourth is anger. The fifth is sadness. The sixth is acedia, meaning anxiety or weariness of heart. The seventh is cenodoxia, that is, boasting or vainglory. The eighth is pride.
Now these eight vices, although they have different origins and are difficult to overcome, nevertheless the first six—gluttony, fornication, avarice, anger, sadness, and acedia—are connected to each other by a certain kinship and, as I might say, by a chain linking them together.
The excess of one vice becomes the beginning of those that follow. For from an abundance of gluttony, fornication necessarily springs up. From fornication comes avarice. From avarice comes anger. From anger comes sadness. From sadness comes acedia.
Therefore we must fight against these vices in a similar manner and with the same strategy, and we must always engage in battle against the preceding vices in order to overcome those that follow.
For this reason, in order to conquer acedia, sadness must be overcome. To drive away sadness, anger must be extinguished. To extinguish anger, avarice must be trampled down. To uproot avarice, fornication must be restrained. To overthrow fornication, the vice of gluttony must be corrected.
The remaining two vices—vainglory and pride—are joined to each other in a similar manner to what we described concerning the earlier vices, such that the growth of the former becomes the origin of the latter. The excess of vainglory gives birth to the kindling of pride.
For when those first six are pulled out, these two bear fruit more vigorously. When those six are dead, these two sprout and grow more vigorously. Therefore we are attacked by these last two in a different manner.
We fall into each of those six vices when we have been crushed by the ones that precede them. But with these last two vices, we find ourselves in danger even as victors after our triumphs.
These eight vices that we have described are divided into four pairings and couplings. Gluttony and fornication are bound together in a special partnership. Similarly, avarice is paired with anger. Sadness and acedia are also joined by the same coupling. Vainglory and pride are also intimately joined to each other.
You have heard about the couplings; now hear about the types of vices.
There are three types of gluttony. The first is when a Christian is driven to eat before the canonical hour. Jonathan, son of Saul, sinned in this way by breaking his father's oath, which is why the people did not deserve to have victory over their enemies. The second type comes from excess of any kind of food or drink. The people of Israel sinned in this way when they made the golden calf, as it is written in the book of Exodus, chapter thirty-two: The people sat down to eat and drink, and they rose up to play. The third type is when someone desires more refined and delicate foods. The sons of Eli sinned in this way, for they refused to accept cooked meat from the people but wanted it raw so they could prepare it more carefully for themselves, as recorded in the first book of Samuel, chapter two.
From these three types, various and very harmful diseases of the soul are produced. From the first type comes anger against the one who was supposed to prepare the food. From the second type, the stings of luxury and lust are aroused. The third type weaves inescapable snares of avarice around the necks of those it captures.
There are three types of fornication. The first is in thought, concerning which the Lord speaks in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter five: Whoever looks at a woman to lust after her, and so forth. The second is what is accomplished through the physical union of both sexes. The third is without the touch of a woman, which the Apostle Paul calls uncleanness in his letter to the Galatians, chapter four.
These three types must be avoided by us with equal vigilance, lest any one of them might deter us and exclude us from the kingdom of Christ.
There are three types of avarice. The first is when someone refuses to be stripped of superfluous possessions. Ananias and Sapphira sinned in this way, as told in the Acts of the Apostles, chapter five. The second type persuades us to take back with greater greed what we have already distributed to the needy. Judas fell into this fault when he sold the Lord. The third type is when we are compelled to desire insatiably or to acquire what we did not possess before. Gehazi sinned in this way.
There are three types of anger. One burns within and because of indignation cannot speak. Another bursts forth into word and deed and action. The third is reserved and stored up through days and seasons.
There are two types of sadness. One is generated when anger ceases, arising from harm that has been inflicted or from a desire that has been blocked. The other descends from rational anxiety of the mind or from despair.
There are two types of acedia. One hurls those who are burning with it into the depths. The other is when it gives no pleasure either to do good or to hear about good. This latter type drives the monk out of his cell.
Vainglory, although it is manifold and multiform and divided into various species, nevertheless has two principal types. The first is when someone is exalted for carnal and obvious things. The second is when we are inflamed with vain praise for spiritual and hidden desires.
There are two types of pride. The first is carnal. The second is spiritual, which is even more destructive. For this latter type attacks especially those whom it discovers to have made progress in certain virtues.
You have heard about the types, the connections, and the chain linking them. Now hear what kinds of daughters are born from them.
From gluttony are born feasting and drunkenness. From fornication come foul speech, buffoonery, ridiculous behavior, and foolish talk. From avarice come lying, fraud, perjury, appetite for shameful gain, false testimony, violence, inhumanity, and greed. From anger come murders, shouting, and indignation. From sadness come rancor, cowardice, bitterness, and despair. From acedia come cruelty, drowsiness, importunity, restlessness, wandering about, instability of mind and body, talkativeness, and curiosity. From vainglory come quarrels, heresies, boasting, and presumption of novelties. From pride come contempt, envy, disobedience, blasphemy, murmuring, and detraction.
These eight vices, then, when they assault the human race, do not attack everyone in the same way. In one person the spirit of fornication holds the principal place. In another, fury rides supreme. In another, vainglory claims tyranny. In another, pride holds the citadel.
And although it is certain that all are attacked by all these vices, nevertheless each of us struggles in a different manner and order. Therefore we must take up battle against these vices in such a way that each person examines the vice by which he is most harassed and undertakes his principal combat against that one.
The lawgiver Moses teaches us that we must maintain one order of battles and not trust in our own strength, in these words from the book of Deuteronomy, chapter seven: You shall not fear them, because the Lord your God is in your midst, a great and terrible God. He himself will consume these nations in your sight little by little and piece by piece. You will not be able to destroy them all at once, lest perhaps the beasts of the earth multiply against you. But the Lord your God will deliver them in your sight until they are utterly destroyed.
Moses similarly warns that we should not be exalted in victory over them, saying in the book of Deuteronomy, chapter eight: After you have eaten and are satisfied, and have built beautiful houses and lived in them, and have herds and flocks of sheep, and an abundance of silver and gold and all things, let not your heart be lifted up, and do not forget the Lord your God who led you out of the land of Egypt, from the house of slavery, and was your guide in the great and terrible wilderness. Solomon also says in the book of Proverbs, chapter twenty-four: If your enemy falls, do not rejoice. In his overthrow, do not be exalted, lest the Lord see it and turn his anger away from him. That is, lest you display the pride of your heart. God will depart from attacking your enemy, and you will begin, abandoned by God, to be tormented again by that passion which you had overcome through God's grace.
Therefore it is fitting that we be certain, instructed both by the facts themselves and by innumerable testimonies of Scripture, that we cannot overcome such great enemies by our own strength unless we are supported by the help of God alone, and that we must daily attribute the sum of our victory to him. Thus the Lord warns through Moses in the book of Deuteronomy, chapter nine: Do not say in your heart, when the Lord your God has destroyed them in your sight, The Lord has brought me in because of my righteousness to possess this land, when these nations have been destroyed because of their own wickedness. For it is not because of your righteousness and the uprightness of your heart that you will go in to possess their land, but because they acted wickedly, they were destroyed when you entered.
I ask you, what could have been said more clearly or more cautiously? With how much caution we must conduct ourselves! These are the seven nations whose lands the Lord promised to give to the children of Israel when they came out of Egypt. According to the Apostle Paul, since these things happened to them as types, we should understand them as written for our instruction. For it is said in the book of Deuteronomy, chapter seven: When the Lord your God brings you into the land which you are entering to possess, and destroys many nations before you—the Hittites, the Girgashites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites—seven nations much more numerous than you and stronger than you, and the Lord delivers them to you, you shall strike them down to complete destruction. Now the reason they are said to be much more numerous is this: because there are more vices than virtues. And so in the catalog, seven nations are numbered, but in the account of their conquest they are mentioned without a specific number. For it says: And he will destroy many nations before you. The people of carnal passions is more numerous than Israel, proceeding from this sevenfold kindling and root of vices, and from the eighth vice, which is better known to all—pride, the queen, as I might say, and mother of all vices. For from these eight spring forth and are born those daughters described earlier: feasting, drunkenness, foul speech, and so on—too lengthy to recount here. Although these seem trivial to us, let us hear what the Apostle Paul thought about them and what judgment he pronounced upon them. In Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter ten, he says: Neither murmur, as some of them murmured and perished by the destroyer. And concerning temptation: Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted and perished by serpents. Concerning detraction, Scripture says: Do not love to detract, lest you be rooted out—and many other similar warnings. Although these derivative vices are much more numerous than the virtues, nevertheless, once those eight principal vices are defeated—from whose nature these others certainly emanate—all the rest immediately fall silent and are destroyed along with them by the same perpetual annihilation. Indeed, as ancient tradition teaches, these same lands of the Canaanites into which the children of Israel were brought had once been allotted to Shem, son of Noah, in the division of the world. But afterward the descendants of Ham took possession of them by force and power through the wickedness of their transgression. In this, God's most righteous judgment is confirmed, for he both expelled those who had wrongly occupied lands belonging to others and restored to these people the ancient possession of their fathers which had been assigned to their lineage in the division of the world. We can recognize with complete certainty that this figure applies to us as well. For the Lord's will naturally assigned the possession of our heart not to vices but to virtues. After Adam's transgression, when vices grew insolent—that is, the Canaanite peoples—the virtues were driven from their own region. When they are restored to it again through God's grace and through our diligence and labor, they should be believed not so much to have occupied foreign lands as to have recovered what was properly theirs. Concerning this sevenfold kindling of vices, Solomon also describes it in the book of Proverbs, chapter twenty-six: If your enemy entreats you with a loud voice, do not consent to him, for there are seven kinds of wickedness in his soul. That is, if gluttony persuades you to relax the body from the discipline of self-control you had just decided upon, do not loosen its subjection, because immediately seven spirits of vice will be present with you, more fierce than that passion which was overcome at the beginning, and they will soon drag you down to worse kinds of vices. Therefore the Lord must be besought in all things, that his mercy may help us where our own strength fails.