<speak>    
    <p>Everything that is without benefit is useless; and everything that is useless is vain. Therefore, everything that is without benefit is vain. And everything that is unhelpful lacks benefit; and everything that lacks benefit is not without vanity. Therefore, everything that is unhelpful is not without vanity. Where there is no usefulness, there is no profit; where there is no profit, there is utmost vanity. Where, therefore, there is no usefulness, there is utmost vanity. In the worship of images, where there is no benefit, no profit, no usefulness, there is utmost vanity to be believed.</p>
    
    <p>For establishing and defending this, whoever makes assemblies and gathers councils and establishes the worship of them without doubt "speaks lies each one to his neighbor"; for neither are they separated from vanity in that they try to violently twist the testimonies of divine scriptures to their own senses, just as they do with this verse of the psalm, which the psalmist, inspired by the divine Spirit, sang with one meaning, but they, inflated with the pride of vanity, understand with another.</p>
    
    <p>If, therefore, we seek whom the prophet spoke about: "They speak lies each one to his neighbor, with deceitful lips," speaking evil in heart and from the heart, let us read the text of the holy gospels, and we will find that the Pharisees and Sadducees, or other groups of Jews, always tempted the Lord and entered into vain plots against him. While they stubbornly refused to believe in Christ, they did not cease to "speak lies." About whom it is also read in another psalm: "For they have sharpened their tongues like a sword, they have bent their bow to shoot in secret at the blameless: suddenly they shoot at him and do not fear" (Psalms 64:3-4).</p>
    
    <p>For "sharpening their tongues" and "having deceitful lips" is one and the same, because it is said in one style of speech, where either by that which contains, that which is contained, or by that which is contained, that which contains, is demonstrated. Likewise, in another psalm, it is written about them: "Their throat is an open sepulcher, they deal deceitfully with their tongues, the venom of asps is under their lips, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness" (Psalms 5:9). Therefore, "an open sepulcher" said their lying mouths, who, speaking deadly evil against the Lord, wished to inflict death upon him, which is why it is called "open" due to their obvious wickedness, which rather increased stench than odor. For it is a comparison made of dissimilar things by a trope, which is called a parable by grammarians.</p>
    
    <p>"They speak lies each one to his neighbor." This is therefore vanity surpassing all vanities, this is deceit stronger than all deceits, when the Redeemer of the world is not believed in, and by the same wicked men, although for the salvation of others, yet to their own damnation, he is crucified.</p>
    
    <p>This verse can also be understood about heretics or schismatics, who, while being imbued with worldly cunning and more inclined to vain investigations and superfluous contentions than to believing, "speak lies each one to his neighbor," because, while they think ill of Christ or the church, they do not cease to invite their neighbors, that is, other heretics, to the same error, so that they might demolish the church, which is the vineyard of Christ, with greater attack. About whom it is said in the Song of Songs: "Catch for us the little foxes that ruin the vineyards, for our vineyards are in bloom" (Song of Solomon 2:15), because, evidently, while heresies or their followers, disciples of heresies or heretics, are caught in their errors by holy and catholic men, the vineyard of the Lord, that is, the church, always thrives more and more with sacred gifts, so that it may forever offer cups of nectarous fragrance to its farmer, who shed his blood for it.</p>
</speak>