To avoid any misunderstanding that a heretic might take from the fact that two names or two persons, that is, the Father and the Son, are being mentioned, as if we are speaking of two gods.

But to prevent any such misunderstanding, when I mention two names or two persons, the Father and the Son, it should not be taken as if I am speaking of two gods. We name the Father and the Son in a way that indicates one God in these persons and names. Let the philosophers and their heretical followers see, who differ by the diversity of powers. For us, there is one God, the Father, as the Apostle said in 
First Corinthians

8:6
, from whom all things come; and we from Him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, God the Son of God, through whom all things come; and we through Him.

For by two, we understand the substance of two divided into parts, and with the names themselves, the nature of acting and commanding dissociated, as well as divided wills and commands. However, the Father and the Son, even if they are believed to be two persons, are one in essence and substance.

The association of unequals is offensive to the better; and to the injury of the one who is the true God, another true one is not compared. When I establish the Father and the Son, I assign the unity of kind. Even if I divide that in persons, the distinctions of persons with the same names again designate the unity of their natural bond.

Hence, the Son is as great as the Father, wholly from the whole, complete from the complete, perfect from perfect, and consummate in virtue. As the Apostle says: In whom all the fullness of the Deity dwells bodily (
Colossians

2:9
). Jeremiah, the most accepted of the prophets, knowing this unity in the Father and the Son, said: This is our God, and no other will be considered besides Him: who found all the way of wisdom and gave it to Jacob His servant, and to Israel His beloved. After this, He appeared on earth and lived among men (Baruch 
3:36-38
). And Isaiah proclaims the same, saying: Thus says the Lord God: Egypt is weary, and the trade of the Ethiopians; and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall pass over to you: they shall be your servants, and they shall walk behind you bound in fetters, and they shall plead with you; for God is in you, and there is no other God besides you: for you are God (
Isaiah

45:14
).

Do not think that I said this with the arrogance attributed to Sabellius, who professes that the Father and the Son are the same person. We do not force everything into one meaning, so that we are caught by the deceit of other heretics. But because in the very name of persons, undivided authority is recognized, and the Son is named not by kind, but personally from the Father; therefore, we ascribe everything to the Father that the Son is; and everything to the Son that the Father is. Nothing will appear to be of the Father that will be judged of the Son, nor of the Son, which is defended of the Father, because the unity of majesty does not allow gods to be called by the plural term since it is evident that the Father and the Son are of one substance, hence each is called one God.

Fearing above all things this, because unless the Father and the Son are one, the interpolated birth would revert to the reproach of the author; this indeed pleased the heretics, that God Almighty, invisible, immense, should degenerate in the Son, not only in power but in condition changed, as if the Father could not have such a one from Himself as He Himself is. Therefore, we defend the true Son from the true Father, who always was, and is of one substance with the Father. And this is what the Greeks call 
ὁμοούσιον
, that is, of one substance; so that the names are heard as persons, and not as words separating the substance.