<speak>
    <p>The face of the church, which Christ addresses with various affectionate names, calling her a dove, beautiful, and a friend, instructing her to rise (that is, to believe), to hurry, to grow in good works, to return, and to come to eternal reward, is not physical but spiritual. For everything written about her in the same Song of Songs must be understood spiritually, not carnally. If this verse can be applied to some physical matter, as those who misuse it for the vision of images dream, then everything written about the members of Christ's bride, the church, must be believed to be physical. And if all these things correspond not to visible members but to invisible virtues, then the face must be understood as an invisible virtue rather than the vision of some image.</p>
    <p>Therefore, the face of the church is the knowledge of her virtues, whose beauty is loved by the bridegroom and to whom it is well said through the prophet: "Because the king desired your beauty." Christ, therefore, encourages the church to show her face to him, that is, to always contemplate him with faith and works, so that she can say with Elijah: "As the Lord lives, in whose presence I stand"; and not be among those whom he denotes through the prophet, saying: "They turned their backs to me and not their faces." He also encourages her to let her voice sound in his ears, because he is ready to listen to his saints, as the psalmist testifies, saying: "The righteous cried out, and the Lord heard them and delivered them out of all their troubles." He says her voice is sweet and her face is lovely because the prayers of the saints are always acceptable to God, and their presence is pleasing, as they have received from Christ's light to remain in the beauty of righteousness.</p>
    <p>Granted, it may be possible to apply this verse to the vision of images: "Show me your face" or "Your face is lovely"; but what can be said about the voice, which the prophet declares to be sweet and encourages to be heard? If souls are not enlivened, they certainly do not enjoy a voice. And if they do not enjoy a voice, much less do they enjoy the sweetness of the voice. Therefore, if souls are not enlivened, they do not enjoy the sweetness of the voice. Hence, it is clear that just as in other assertions from this matter, their words are irrelevant, so also in this part they are thwarted, especially since it cannot be rightly said of the vision of their faces: "Show me your face," nor of their voice, which they entirely lack: "Let me hear your voice, for your voice is sweet, and your face is lovely."</p>
</speak>