
by Honorius Augustodunensis
Patrologia Latina Volume 

A Little Book of Eight Questions on Angels and Man.

Chapter 1: Whether Man Would Exist If Angels Had Not Fallen

Student: I would like to be shown by reliable authority, and proved by solid reasoning, whether humanity would have been created if the angel had remained steadfast in heaven. For since the authority of a certain great teacher says that, so the number of the elect might be completed, man was created as the tenth order, it seems that the human race was multiplied only for this purpose: to make up the diminished number of the angels. And so, as a consequence, the fall of the angel would have been the cause of humanity’s creation.
Master: Authority is nothing other than truth that has been proved by reason. And what authority teaches us to believe, reason proves that we must hold. The clear authority of Scripture proclaims it, and sharp reasoning confirms it: even if all the angels had remained in heaven, humanity, with all its descendants, would still have been created.

This world, after all, was made for the human being. And the world means heaven and earth, together with everything contained within their whole expanse. So it seems very absurd to believe that, if the angels had stood firm, the one for whom the whole universe is said to have been created would not himself have been created.

To remove this error, sacred Scripture, foreknowing the future, begins before the creation of angel and human being by saying, as Scripture says in Genesis, chapter one: “In the beginning God created heaven and earth.” Why heaven? Certainly so that it might be the dwelling-place of the angels. Why earth? Clearly so that it might be the dwelling-place of human beings.

And the authority of that great man, Gregory, does not oppose this view. It actually supports it. For the number of the elect did not consist only of angels, but of angels and human beings together. And because the complete number of the elect was not present in the nine orders of angels, humanity was created as the tenth order so that this number might be completed.

That the human being was created along with the angel is testified by God the Creator himself, speaking to Job, in Job, chapter forty: “Behold Behemoth, whom I made with you.” That is to say: “When I made the human being, I also made the angel.”

Now there is a twofold creation of humanity. One is in eternity, through predestination; the other is within time, through formation. Concerning the creation of predestination it is written in Genesis, chapter one: “Let us make man according to our image and likeness.” And again: “God made man according to his image and likeness.” Concerning the creation of formation, it is written in Genesis, chapter two: “God formed man from the mud of the earth and breathed into his face the breath of life, and he became a living soul.” For, as Scripture says in Ecclesiasticus, chapter eighteen, “The one who remains forever created all things together.”

God created all things together as matter, but distinguished them across six days by genera, species, forms, and numbers. Those six days should not be understood as changeable days like ours, but as fixed in eternity; our days were made according to their pattern. And because the number six is a perfect number, Scripture says that God made all things in six days, to suggest that God’s work was perfect. This work is divided into six parts: three elements, and three groups of things created from them.

The elements are fire, water, and earth. From fire were created the angels, the lights, and the stars. From earth were created human beings, trees, plants, and animals. From the waters were created fish and birds. Water, however, has a double nature. One kind is thick and always clings to the earth; it is called the sea, and fish are said to have been brought forth from it. The other kind is thin and suspended above the earth; it is called air, and birds are known to have been created from it.

As for the angel being “the beginning of the ways of God,” this is written in Job. The human being, by contrast, is said to be God’s last work. So by the angel the beginning of God’s works is indicated, and by the human being their completion is indicated; and to the human being all the rest of creation is subjected.

Therefore, just as angels are not created in place of lost human beings, so human beings should not be believed to have been created in place of fallen angels. Rather, they were created to possess their own place of glory and to complete the tenth order of the elect. They are said to have been made “in place of” the lost angels because they are to be taken up into the glory from which those angels fell. But that would still have happened even if none of the angels had fallen.

And notice this: no human being worships an angel, but a multitude of angels worships above themselves the man who is God, the one who restored all things in heaven and on earth. He did this when he freed humanity on earth from the power of the devil and united humanity in heaven with the angels.

Chapter 2: Whether Christ Would Become Incarnate Without Sin

Student: Since it has been reasonably proved that the angel’s fall was not the cause of humanity’s creation, and that the human being was created not in place of the angel but for his own sake, I would likewise like to be taught, with the same authority and with reason accompanying it, whether Christ would have become incarnate if the human being had remained steadfast in paradise.

For since all Scripture proclaims that Christ came in the flesh for human redemption, people think he would never have come in the flesh if there had been no sinful human being for him to redeem. And so human sin seems to have been the cause of Christ’s incarnation. But if that is so, then that sin was not evil. Indeed, it was a great good, because on account of it God became man, and, as a consequence, man became God.
Master: Human sin was not good; it was the greatest evil. The whole world proclaims this with all its many miseries. For why does death reign in the world with so many disasters, if not because of human sin? Therefore the sin of the first human being was not the cause of Christ’s incarnation. Rather, it was the cause of death and condemnation.

The cause of Christ’s incarnation was the predestination of humanity’s deification. From eternity, God had predestined that the human being should be made divine. The Lord says in the Gospel of John, chapter seventeen: “Father, you loved them before the foundation of the world.” Understand this to mean: “you loved those who were to be deified through me.”

Now, just as God is unchangeable, so his predestination is unchangeable. Therefore Christ had to become incarnate so that humanity could be deified. So it does not follow that sin was the cause of his incarnation. What follows instead is this: sin could not change God’s purpose concerning the deification of humanity. Indeed, the authority of sacred Scripture and plain reason both declare that God would have assumed humanity even if humanity had never sinned.

In fact, foreseeing Scripture promises Christ even before human sin when it says in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter nineteen: “A man shall leave father and mother, and cling to his wife, and the two shall be in one flesh.” The Apostle explains this by saying in Paul’s letter to the Ephesians, chapter five: “This is a great sacrament; I mean it with reference to Christ and the Church.” Look: no sin has yet been committed by the human being, and already the union of Christ and the Church in one flesh is proclaimed.

So the same Apostle says in Paul’s letter to the Ephesians, chapter one: “God chose us in Christ before the foundation of the world.” Christ is God and man. In him, before the foundation of the world, God chose for life those whom he had predestined, because God determined that we would be deified in Christ. For when God clothed himself in human nature, then all humanity—at least in the elect—passed over into God.

But also the first angel, who seized for himself the likeness of God that the Son alone possessed, found Christ as judge on earth when he was driven from heaven and fell. For the one through whom the Father founded the earth was still hidden in the material of the earth: the one who would plunge the fugitive angel from heaven beneath the earth, and raise the humble human being from the earth above heaven.

As for the fact that Christ died, though he is the life of all, there are three states of humanity. The first was before sin, when the human being was able to die and also able not to die. The second was after sin, when the human being had to die. The third would have belonged to him if he had been tempted and had not sinned; and this same state is still hoped for after the resurrection, when the human being will not be able to die.

So if Christ had come in the first state, neither he nor humanity would ever have died. Instead, once humanity had been deified and the number of the tenth order had been completed, humanity would have been joined to the angels. That is exactly what would have happened if the human being, when tempted, had not sinned.

But Christ knew beforehand that humanity would sin and, because of that, would die. Therefore he chose to come and die in the second state, so that he might redeem humanity from death and restore humanity to the state of life. For this reason he is said to have come for human redemption: because unless he had destroyed our death by dying, humanity after guilt would never have regained the state of life.

Therefore Christ’s incarnation was the deification of human nature; his death was the destruction of our death; his resurrection was the restoration of our life. And in this way, according to the Apostle in Paul’s first letter to the Corinthians, chapter fifteen: “As in Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive.”

Chapter 3: How Angels Were Created from Fire

Student: That answer seems plausible to me, because authority supports reason, and reason supports authority. But since spirit is better than body, I am puzzled that you said angels were created from fire. Fire is a body, while angels are spirits. So I do not see how something better can be said to have been created from something worse, unless that claim is proved by solid arguments.
Master: To say that a spirit is created from a body would be the claim of a madman. But to say that a body is created from bodies, or from the elements, is a true assertion. Angelic spirits, human souls, and the unformed matter of the world were created from nothing. From that unformed matter the elements were then separated, as Scripture says, “He made the world from unformed matter.” All bodies, however, were formed from the four elements. That is, each body is assigned especially to the element that predominates in it. That is why some bodies are called heavenly or fiery, some earthly, some watery, and some airy.
Master: The bodies of souls are earthly bodies, as Scripture says in Genesis, chapter two: “God formed man from the mud of the earth,” meaning the human body. About the soul it then adds, in the same chapter of Genesis: “And he breathed into his face the breath of life.” Earlier, Scripture had said about the soul’s creation, in Genesis, chapter one: “God made man in his own image and likeness,” meaning the human soul. God is bodiless, and so the soul, in which God’s image exists, is also bodiless.
Master: About the bodies of animals, Scripture says in Genesis, chapter one: “Let the earth bring forth cattle and beasts according to their kind,” meaning the bodies of cattle and beasts. About fish and birds it also says, in the same chapter of Genesis: “Let the waters bring forth fish and birds according to their kind.” Understand this to mean the bodies of fish and birds. Scripture says “waters” because water has a double nature: a thick kind, as in the sea, and a thin kind, as in the air.
Master: The bodies of angelic spirits, however, are fiery, as Scripture says in the letter to the Hebrews, chapter one: “He makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.” That means this: God made the angelic spirits from nothing, but he created their bodies from fire. Scripture speaks of the creation of those bodies in Genesis, chapter one: “God said, ‘Let there be light,’” as if to say, “Let the shining bodies of the angels be made from fire.”
Master: Just as a rational soul clothed with a body is called a human being, so an intellectual spirit clothed with a body is called an angel. In ancient times angels appeared to human beings not in borrowed bodies, but in their own bodies. They spoke with them, walked with them, and ate with them. All these things happened in the historical sense, not merely in a figurative sense. Yet, for the carrying out of their office, angels could transform those bodies into different appearances. That is why they were sometimes seen shining with a lightning-bright face, and sometimes with dazzling white clothing.
Master: And in many writings of the saints, demons are said to run about through the air. For spirits without bodies do not run about, since as spirits they are not located in a place. It should also be noticed that Genesis says nothing about the creation of spirits, because Genesis does not usually tell the story of invisible nature, but of the visible creation of bodies. The Apostle proclaims this in Paul’s letter to the Colossians, chapter one: “Whether visible or invisible, in the heavens and on the earth, all things were made through him.” The invisible things are spirits; the visible things are their bodies.

Chapter 4: Why God Took a Body from Earth, Not Fire

Student: In this answer, reason agrees well with authority. But earth is the lowest element, the dregs of all the elements, while fire is the highest and purest element. So what reason is there for the Creator God to have taken a body not from fire, but from earth?
Master: The center is more noble than the circle. The center is fixed and unmoving, while the circle turns and moves. Earth is the center of the elements: fixed and stable. Fire is like a circle: unstable in its motion. And although all the elements are equal in the dignity of their creation, still, when considered according to natural shapes, the center holds first place. Earth is the center of the world and the nurse of all living things. Fire, by contrast, destroys them, although some creatures are said to be unharmed in fire, as people report about the salamander.
Master: Moreover, earth is the first of God’s works, as Scripture says in Psalm one hundred one: “In the beginning, you, Lord, founded the earth.” God gave bodies to two rational creatures from the first and the highest elements: the human being from earth, to be deified in God himself; and the angel from fire, to be glorified in heaven. Therefore these two elements will be changed into the glory of the children of God, as Scripture says in Isaiah, chapter sixty-two: “The Lord will make a new heaven and a new earth.” In that new earth, the bodies of human beings—of the elect alone—will already have been deified and will shine like the sun, and they will be equal to the bodies of the angels. Those angelic bodies shine with a brightness like the sun, which of course is fire. This will happen when Christ reforms the body of our lowliness, making it conform to the body of his glory. Christ appeared like the sun on the mountain, when he appeared to his disciples in the glory of the future state.
Master: Besides this, one point must be noticed very carefully. Human beings, made from the first element, were killed in water; angels, however, created from the highest element, that is, from fire, when they sinned were hurled down into the second element, that is, into the air. Both groups will still be condemned in fire, while earth, deified in Christ and in the elect, will be exalted above the heavens.

Chapter 5: Whether the Angel’s Fall Was Irreparable Because He Was Immortal, and Man’s the Reverse

Student: I do not find persuasive the claim made by some people. They say that the angel’s fall was irreparable because the angel was immortal, while the human being’s fall could be repaired because the human being could die. But is it true that God wanted nothing except death alone for the reconciliation of both angels and humans?
Master: That view is not proved by authority, and it is not strengthened by reason—especially since authority cries out in the Wisdom of Solomon, chapter one: “God did not make death, nor does he rejoice in the destruction of the dying.” And again, through the prophet in Ezekiel, chapter thirty-three: “I do not desire the death of the sinner.” Reason also does not allow one contrary to be joined to its opposite. Light is opposed to darkness; it does not receive darkness, but drives it away. Life is opposed to death; it does not choose death, but rather destroys it. Death is the punishment of sin, which humanity would never have undergone. Therefore God, who is life, does not demand death from either angel or human being. Instead, because death is contrary both to himself and to nature, he takes it away.
Master: Yet the nature of things requires that whatever is discordant in the universe should be brought into harmony through something contrary to it, or something like it. For example, low notes are contrary to high notes, and for that reason they are dissonant. But through the same musical resonances, they become similar and harmonious.
Master: The human being, by disobeying God, became obedient to the devil in injustice. Because of that injustice, humanity fell under the death it deserved. In this way humanity created discord in the universe: created for life, it collapsed into death. But Christ restored harmony by a contrary action performed from within the same human nature. He became obedient to God in righteousness, and because of that righteousness he endured an undeserved death. Thus, by destroying death, he redeemed humanity from death.
Master: Justice required this: just as the human being was created without sin, then offended God by sinning, and therefore suffered the penalty of death; so someone from the human race, existing without sin, had to live righteously and so appease God, undergo death for God’s sake, and through that death reconcile his companions to God. Because Christ did these things, people say that God wanted nothing except death as satisfaction. But God did not seek this from an angel, because an angel could not die.
Master: But it was just that, just as that fallen angel exalted himself above all things when he wanted to be like the Most High, and for that reason fell below all things, so someone from that same number, existing without guilt, should humble himself below all things without seeing the punishment of the fallen, praising God’s justice in his judgments, accuse his own injustice, and by this confession of praise raise up his companions. But the angel who fell away from the truth, in which he did not stand, still persists in the lie whose father he is, as the Gospel of John says in chapter eight. He says: “My rivers are mine, and I made them. I made myself. I am God and not a man.” And because that voice is incorrigible, his fall is therefore beyond recovery.

Chapter 6: Why We Still Die after Christ Defeated Death

Student: It troubles me greatly that all of us still die, even though death is proclaimed to have been destroyed through Christ.
Master: There are two deaths: one of the body, and the other of the soul. The death of the body is the separation of the soul from the body. The death of the soul is the separation of the soul from God. Therefore, just as bodily death takes away the joys of the world, so the soul’s death takes away the joys of heaven. Christ destroyed this death when he freed souls from punishments and brought them into the joys of heaven. He will destroy death still further when he clothes souls again with their bodies—bodies that no death will ever separate from them again.

Chapter 7: Why the resurrection of the dead will happen.

Student: I had thought that the resurrection would take place at the last day even if Christ had never become incarnate, since it had been foretold by the prophets.
Master: The resurrection will not happen because the prophets foretold it. Rather, the prophets foretold it because it was going to happen. A prophetic word does not force anything to take place. Instead, the Holy Spirit, for whom everything past and future is present, announced in advance to his own people what he himself had long ago decided to do, or what human beings were going to do, so that they would know that he sees everything. Now, the resurrection takes place so that the good may receive complete joy, and the evil complete punishment. Neither of these can happen fully except in both body and soul. The righteous, reconciled through Christ, are taken up into life. If they had not been reconciled, they would never be taken up there. So if Christ had not come in the flesh, had not destroyed our death by his own death, and had not restored life to us by his resurrection, no one would ever rise to life. Everyone alike would remain in death.

Chapter 8: Why God does not bring every human being after the resurrection into blessed life, especially infants who die without fault.

Student: Since the human race was created for life, and through Christ the whole race has been restored for life, I am very puzzled why he does not bring all human beings after the resurrection into blessed life—especially infants, who were entirely without fault.
Master: Christ, who is the resurrection and the life, will raise all human beings to life. And because he himself is justice, he will glorify only the righteous in blessed life, and will leave the unrighteous in misery. And because his hidden judgment surpasses every human understanding, he takes some guilty people, purified by purgatorial fire, into glory, as he chooses. And he leaves some innocent people in misery, as he chooses—namely, infants whom the water of baptism has not regenerated. For it is better to be saved by mercy than ever to be condemned by the sentence of the Judge. Why he does this is no more something we can search out than we can discover why he did not make angels into archangels, or those beings into thrones; why he did not make women into men, or beasts into birds; why he gave the peacock such beauty of feathers beyond the other birds; and many similar things. As Scripture says in Psalm one hundred thirteen: “He has done, and does, whatever he has willed.”