Contra Collatorem:  A Defense of Augustine by Prosper of Aquitaine
Introduction
Among the critics of the doctrine defended by Saint Augustine in his books against the Pelagians, and particularly in the most recent ones, the most famous and learned was John Cassianus, a priest and abbot of Marseilles in the notable city of Gaul. He, as it appears more likely, was originally from Lesser Scythia, which was one of the provinces of Thrace, around the year 350 or 360, and was educated in one of the monasteries near the Bethlehem manger. He was moderately well-versed in classical literature, which Prosper acknowledges made him excel in the debates he had with those he lived with in Marseilles.
After traveling through Egypt and listening to the distinguished inhabitants of Egypt's deserts, he himself led an anchoritic life for some time. He then went to Constantinople, where he was ordained as a deacon by Saint John Chrysostom, and later elevated to the honor of the priesthood by the same. He went to Rome in the year 405 AD, and then around at least the year 415 AD, he returned to Marseilles. In that city, he built two monasteries, one for men and another for women, and he presided over the former, which has been notable by the name of Saint Victor from then to the current times.
While living in this place, at the request of Castor, bishop of the Church of Apt in the second Narbonensian, he wrote instructions suited to the governance of the monasteries established by Castor. It is clear that these were written at a time when disputes about grace were still heated, since it was already observed that he was less favorable to Augustine's doctrine than would be fitting, misled by the erroneous principle that the work of our salvation begins with us through the merit of good will, which is then brought to completion by God: this means we are distinguished by ourselves, having something that we did not receive, and therefore being able to glory not in the Lord, but in ourselves. But you would rightly surmise that these were expressed by him before the sentences against the Pelagians were pronounced by Innocent or Zosimus, after whose condemnation he would not have dared to affirm with such heretics that nothing but the law could be called the aid of divine grace.
By the same author and speaker, he also undertook to write down the series of spiritual conferences he had with the Eastern monks. He dedicated the first ten of these, after the early death of his friend Castor, to Leontius, bishop of Fréjus, and Helladius, who was not yet a bishop. He composed the following seven at the request of the saints Honoratus of Arles and Eucherius of Lyon, who later became bishops, in the year 426 AD. In these Conferences, among many things most useful for the edification of the monks of Lérins, for whose use they were intended, and worthy of the praises with which Cassianus was adorned by many learned and holy men, there are also many scattered passages, and especially almost the entire thirteenth conference, opposed to the doctrine of Saint Augustine concerning grace.
In this matter, Cassianus was more dangerously mistaken than in others, both because of the importance of the subject and the circumstances of the times. For the errors of the Pelagians had first been condemned in Rome in 418 AD, then immediately by many councils in the Eastern parts, when he published this thirteenth conference in the year 426 AD: in which indeed the same error is more explicitly contained, of which a sufficiently evident trace was already found in the third conference. Therefore, with a man of such authority as Cassianus was held, introducing a new doctrine in the heat of disputes, which, as Prosper observed, was neither entirely consistent with the heresy condemned by the Church nor in full agreement with the doctrine of Saint Augustine, who had been a major part in the condemnation of the Pelagians, it could not at all happen without considerable disturbance arising from it.
For there was no reason to reject the errors inserted in the conference into the abbot Chaeremon, whom he had introduced as speaking, since he testified that he himself fully embraced and approved of these. It was indeed his intention when he published the Conferences to express his own views while extolling with great praises the teachings of those to whom he pretended to have committed the office of teaching. It was also sufficiently evident from other places that everything approved by Chaeremon was approved by him.
Pronounced by the abbey; he demonstrated that he had sufficiently performed this duty by neither disapproving of this doctrine nor showing that it could be doubted by even the smallest objection.
Hence, it happened that many in our Gaul, especially among the servants of God, who are usually called monks, who lived in Marseilles, rose against Augustine's doctrine.
There is no doubt that they were led into errors by Cassian's authority, along with his other followers.
These monks of Marseilles were renowned men, outstanding in the pursuit of all virtues, and so respected for their integrity that many considered it safest to follow whatever they heard these monks assert without question.
Among them, Cassian was considered the most learned, and he did not hesitate to publish his thoughts in writing.
In the beginning, these monks acted cautiously, preferring to blame their own slowness rather than criticize what they did not understand in Augustine's writings.
Some of them even wanted to demand a clearer and more open explanation from him.
However, it later became clear that their darkness was born not so much from ignorance or weakness as from pride, which most affects those whose virtues are highly regarded by people.
When a book titled "On Correction and Grace," which Augustine had written in 427 to instruct the monks of Hadrumetum, was fortuitously brought to Gaul, and that book seemed to answer all the objections of the monks of Marseilles almost deliberately, they should have used the light from this book to make progress and dispel all their doubts.
However, they instead burned with greater hatred against the truth, complaining among other things that none of the church writers before Augustine had applied Paul's passages to the sense of predestination.
This objection was most fitting for Cassian, who was well-versed in Greek books, from which this objection could more naturally arise.
Because of this, Prosper and Hilary wrote letters to Saint Augustine around 428 or 429, and he responded with the books "On the Predestination of the Saints" and "On the Gift of Perseverance."
How these books were received by the Gauls is not clear; however, it is clear that they did not immediately end the turmoil of such disputes.
While Augustine was still alive, Saint Prosper wrote a letter to Rufinus, in which he testified that he hoped for this from the riches of God's mercy: that those who were then allowed to be deceived by their free will and to stray from the path of humility would not be deprived of understanding forever or to the end, but that this very delay in recalling them would serve to celebrate the work of God's grace with greater glory, when He would also subdue the hearts of even those who opposed Him, whose pursuit of virtue had become a danger, and whose uprightness of conduct had become a risk.
It is rightly doubted whether this last point should be understood of Cassian, who was known to stray further from the truth than the rest, if not in his doctrines, then at least in the way he defended his doctrines.
After Augustine was taken among the blessed, Prosper and Hilary went to Pope Celestine to lay their complaints against certain priests who had stirred up dissensions in Gaul against the doctrine of Saint Augustine, and who did not even spare his reputation.
Hence, in that famous response of his, which can be read above, Celestine accused those who, distinguished only by their rank of priesthood, did not hesitate to judge the doctrine of the Church according to their whim, and arrogated to themselves an authority that belonged only to bishops.
These words likely referred particularly to Cassian: this is more easily conjectured because the first among the bishops to whom this letter was addressed was Venerius, bishop of Marseilles, according to Gennadius.
However, Celestine's letters did not calm the disturbances, nor did they restore peace to the provincial churches.
Therefore, when Sixtus the Third succeeded Celestine, which happened on April 26, 432, according to Baronius, or a few months later, Saint Prosper found it necessary to again defend Augustine's doctrine with his pen, which continued to be brought into disrepute by slanderous writings.
And so that all might know what errors...
Those who opposed such a great teacher were overwhelmed, and he took on the task of refuting the thirteenth conference of Cassian. He indeed surpassed all of Augustine's opponents in doctrine and could not deny the writings he had published. However, he did not want to mention him by name but titled the book
Cassian had mainly taught this: that the beginning of good will and faith sometimes comes from God and sometimes from man; that the seeds of virtues should be recognized in us; that free will can naturally incline towards good; that this is sometimes preceded by grace but often precedes the gifts of grace. Saint Prosper proves that all these teachings are the consequences of the Pelagian doctrines. From this, it follows that grace is given according to the merits of men; that human nature is not harmed by Adam's sin; that such errors, along with the Pelagian doctrines, were long ago condemned in various councils of bishops and in the letters and decrees of the highest pontiffs; and that finally, Saint Augustine had uprooted and dissipated them from the foundations in many of his writings.
Therefore, Pope Gelasius, around the year 494, in a council of bishops held in Rome, classified Cassian's writings among the apocrypha.
To give as much honor as possible to the excellent work of our Prosper, it seemed useful to readers if we prefaced Prosper's entire response with the thirteenth conference of Cassian. Note: Since we have already published this conference of Cassian among the works of the author himself, we do not think it needs to be reviewed again. Therefore, reader, see our slightly earlier volume 49, where it is included with the other Conferences.
The work, otherwise dangerous by itself, will be read without risk and even with some benefit if it is compared with the invincible response of the distinguished doctor.
Chapter One
The Slanderers of Saint Augustine's Doctrine Lead to the Belief That the Enemies of Grace Were Unjustly Condemned by the Church. Hence, there is a Greater Need to Refute Them.
Some people dare to say that the grace of God, by which we are Christians, was not rightly defended by Bishop Augustine of blessed memory, and they do not cease to attack his books written against the Pelagian error with excessive slanders.
The internal domestic malice of these people would be no less to be scorned than the external barking of heretical loquacity, unless those who, under the name of sheep, support the wolves expelled from the Lord's sheepfold were of such a kind that neither their rank in the Church nor their intellects should seem to be despised.
Since they have the appearance of godliness in zeal, whose power they deny in understanding, they draw many uneducated people to themselves, and disturb hearts that do not have the discernment of spirits. They endeavor to bring the cause of the Church to such a state, that while affirming that our people did not speak truthfully for grace, they persuade that the enemies of grace were unjustly condemned.
Therefore, this evil must not be neglected, which grows daily from hidden and small seeds and spreads farther and wider from its origin. We must strive, as much as the Lord helps, to uncover the hypocrisy of deceitful slanderers, who from the very magnitude of the injury they inflict on one, that is, blessed Augustine, whom I have in mind...
My priests praised.
But we suspect it is merely a gloss of the scribe.
They brought to all, and especially to the pontiffs of the apostolic see, from the unlearned and less cautious, those judged of superior knowledge, and with miserable and perverse success, they easily draw consent to a lie, because they earned reverence through presumption.
For, since they are men of good reputation, they are believed in no way to have been able to burst into the clamor of a superfluous complaint through slowness of understanding or rashness of judgment.
And not rather to have labored with great ingenuity and intense study, so that with the discussions of the most subtle disputant comprehended, now stricter censorship and more discerning inspection might find what previous careless favor and uncurious kindness had not seen.
Where then did this diligence of such a severe examination arise?
Why did the stern brow of such austerity arm itself, to sift the measures of thoughts, the weights of words, the number of syllables, as a treacherous examiner, and presume to accomplish something great if he attaches a mark of error to a Catholic preacher?
As if some unknown work, which has hitherto been hidden, were attacked: and not that doctrine is torn apart by these bites, which has scattered the inventions of new heretics and crushed the diabolical pride of Pelagian arrogance.
For more than twenty years, the Catholic army has been fighting and winning against the enemies of God’s grace under the guidance of this man.
And it wins, I say, because it does not allow those it has conquered to breathe, and in whose destruction, the hand of all priests wrote one sentence.
Driven from the pontificate and deprived of communion, they complain about the happiness of our victory, and arm their tongues against us, preferring to be exiled from the truth rather than citizens of the Church.
But our fellow members and co-participants in the grace of Christ, why do they complain about these arms with which the common faith was defended?
Why do they retract the completed war and weaken the fortifications of long-secured peace?
Are the victors displeasing, and the conquered pleasing; and are the condemned errors so insolently favored that out of envy of depravity,
And our authors are to be struck and judged? Or has the standard of the new judges been so strictly applied, that they claim none of the things that have been cut out, and reject some of the things that have been defended?
Behold, with the peace of the Catholic victory preserved, with the reverence of the unbreakable decrees preserved, we are ready to listen to the advocates of a more corrected doctrine, and to recognize the lines of the most subtle discretion cut off from all error.
Chapter Two: Why he primarily addresses the definitions of Cassian.
Cassian's first Catholic definition.
From which later begins to introduce the definition that many come to grace without grace.
And so that we do not seem to obscure the knowledge of the learned by stirring up things that the ignoble crowd and the reckless chatter of the foolish intemperately pour out, we will refer primarily to the definitions of one who undoubtedly excels all of them in the study of the Holy Scriptures.
These also must for the time being be taken up for consideration because it cannot be doubted whether they are so.
For they are written and published by their author: now it is not to be asked whether they are, but to be demonstrated what they teach.
Therefore, in the book titled "On the Protection of God," a certain priest (Cassian), who excels in the practice of disputation among those with whom he lived, introduces a certain abbot (Chaeremon) discussing the grace of God and free will, whose opinion he shows he thoroughly approved and adopted.
So now our business is not with him, who perhaps would refute his opinions either by denying them or by correcting them; but with this one, who strives to bring forth such teaching to serve as a tool for the enemies of God's grace.
However, this teaching at the beginning of the disputation does not deviate from the piety of truth and would deserve to be honored with just praise, if it did not deviate from the commenced rectitude with a hasty and leftward progress.
For after the comparison of the farmer, to whom he fitted the form of one living under grace and faith, and whose labor he said would be fruitless unless aided by the help of God in everything, he introduced the most Catholic definition, saying:
From which it is clearly gathered that not only the actions but also the beginnings of good thoughts are from God: who inspires in us the beginnings of holy will, and grants the strength and opportunity to carry out those things we rightly desire.
James 1:17: "For every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights: who both begins what is good and carries it out and completes it in us, as the Apostle says."
Second Corinthians 9:10: "He who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply and multiply your seed for sowing and increase the harvest of your righteousness."
Here, lest anyone think there is nothing left that is done through free will,
Not unreasonably added to show that it was not taken away by these gifts but rather strengthened, unless
Turned back to their own iniquities, they preferred to turn away from God's help.
But it is ours, he says, to humbly follow the grace of God that draws us daily,
Or certainly with stiff necks and uncircumcised ears, as it is written in
Acts
chapter 7, verse 51, resisting Him, through Jeremiah we deserve to hear,
Shall the one who falls not rise again? Or shall the one who turns away not return?
(Jeremiah chapter 8, verse 4) Why then has this people turned away in Jerusalem with a persistent turning away: they have hardened their necks, and refused to return?
Likewise below, when he had taught that all efforts of virtues need God's grace, he added in a reasonable manner, saying (Conference 13, chapter 6):
All these things, as they cannot be continually desired by us without divine inspiration,
So neither can they be perfected in any way without His help.
But in the seventh chapter (now it is chapter 8), wishing to show the general grace of Christ, which does not overlook any person entirely and does not abandon even the rebellious and opposed:
Therefore, he says, the divine protection is inseparably with us
And such is the Creator's affection for His creation that not only does He accompany it, but also precedes it
Continually with providence. In which it can be seen, for this reason he said providence as a companion, because
Even those who often abandon themselves He does not abandon; or because He follows all those He precedes.
He continues saying: When He sees in us the beginning of good will, He illuminates it
And strengthens it, and directs it to salvation, giving it increase, which He either planted Himself,
Or saw emerge from our effort.
And here he can still say that he meant the beginning of that good will to be from God
As inspired or planted principles: because from hearts already illuminated
Salutary efforts can emerge, which are therefore said to be the person's own, because he has already received the ability for good efforts, and their seeds are referred to their author.
In the ninth chapter he added,
And he said:
It is not easily discerned by human reason how the Lord gives to those who ask, is found by those who seek, and opens to those who knock.
And again, is found by those who do not seek Him, clearly appears among those who did not question Him.
He extends His hands all day long to a people who do not believe Him and contradict Him, calling those who resist and are placed far off.
Isaiah 65:1
Drawing the unwilling to salvation, withholding the opportunity to sin from those who wish to sin, kindly opposing those who hasten to evil.
Now here, as if through an inscrutable diversity, a definition is introduced which teaches that many come to grace without grace, and that this desire of asking, seeking, knocking, is held by some from the vigilance of free will.
However, it is reported to be so blinded in others by such great aversion that it cannot be recalled by any exhortations unless it is led by the force of one who draws the unwilling.
As if this were not done in the souls of all by the varied work of grace, so that the unwilling are made willing; or anyone of those who already use the judgment of reason could receive faith except by will.
Hence it is as absurd to say that anyone tends to the participation of grace unwillingly, as to assert that anyone comes to it without being incited by the Spirit of God.
Therefore, this disputant quickly forgot the definition he previously stated, quickly dissented from his own opinion with unstable levity.
For he had said regularly, "Not only the beginning of good actions, but also of good thoughts, is from God."
See above, chapter 2, number 2
And lest this should be understood as doctrine applied externally, he had vigilantly added:
Who inspires us with the beginnings of holy will, and grants the strength and opportunity to perform what we rightly desire.
For every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, descending from the Father of lights, who begins what is good, and carries out and completes it in us.
Catholic teacher, why do you abandon your profession?
Why do you fall back into the smoky darkness of falsehood, leaving the light of the clearest truth?
What you marvel at in those who ask, seek, and knock, why do you not ascribe to the same grace that is desired?
You see good efforts, pious studies, and you doubt they are God's gifts?
The work of grace may have been hidden, while the faith planted in thought was closed in secrecy:
but where there is supplicant prayer, diligent inquiry, frequent knocking, why do you not understand the supply of incitement from the quality of the work?
Chapter Three
Cassian does not fully agree with either the Pelagians or the Catholics: while erring, he asserts that some are justified by grace, and others by law and nature.
Cassian's third definition: Man has the desire for virtues from himself.
This is refuted based on what was previously confessed in the first definition.
And you sufficiently arm yourself against the slanders of the Pelagians.
And you think you sufficiently guard yourself against the slanders of the Pelagians if you concede to us what must be felt in the whole of those called, in part.
But neither with the heretics nor with the Catholics do you have full agreement.
They maintain the beginnings of free will in all just works of men: we always believe that the beginnings of good thoughts come from God.
You found some vague third thing, inconvenient to both parties, by which you neither gain the agreement of the enemies nor remain in the understanding of our people.
But how do you not notice, you fall into that damnation, which, whether you want it or not, you are convicted of saying, that the grace of God is given according to our merits; when you affirm that some good work precedes in men themselves, for which they receive grace?
For it cannot be considered of no merit the faith of the petitioner, the piety of the seeker, the persistence of the one who knocks; especially when all such are said both to receive and to find, and to enter.
In which it is superfluous, indeed impious, to want to make room for merits existing before grace, so that it is not wholly true what the Lord says, "No one comes to me unless the Father who sent me draws him" (John 6:44); which would in no way be said, if anyone's conversion were to be believed without God's illumination; or if in any way the human will could extend to God without God, who draws him called to the Son.
Not compelling the unwilling, but makes the unwilling willing, and in any way bends the resistance of the unbeliever; so that the heart of the listener, generated with the delight of obedience in itself, arises where it was pressed; learns there, where it was ignorant; hence it trusts, where it doubted; hence it wills, where it was unwilling.
For the Lord will give sweetness, and our land will give its fruit (Psalm 85:12).
But let us see what follows (Conference 13, ch. 9): To whom it is easily open, how the sum of salvation is attributed to our choice?
Of which it is said, "If you are willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of the land" (Isaiah 1:19).
And how it is not of him who wills nor of him who runs, but of God who shows mercy (Romans 9:16)?
What also is that, which God will repay each one according to his works (Matthew 16:27); and, "It is God who works in you both to will and to do, for His good pleasure" (Philippians 2:13): and this not from you, but from God.
Is it not from works, so that no one can boast?
Behold, as if collected from the Scriptures, he almost collides with himself in an alternate sense.
And the rest, which is collected from the Scriptures, as if gathered with an alternate opposing sense, so that he entrusts the efforts of human industry to the gifts of grace.
With the division of all people made, some are those whom the grace of God saves, others whom the law and nature justify.
But the law can command that no evil be done; however, it cannot free from evil.
It makes the commandment known, but does not provide the affection to obey:
Unless what is killing through the command of the letter becomes life-giving through the spirit of grace.
After this, he concludes, saying:
But in all these things both the grace of God and our free will are declared.
And because sometimes by his own impulses a person can extend to the desires of virtues, but always needs to be helped by the Lord.
And where is it, that by the preceding regular definition: Not only the beginning of good actions, but also of good thoughts, is from God, who begins, executes, and completes what is good in us (See above, chapter 1, number 4)?
Behold here, even if you confess the necessary help of God for good beginnings: yet you attribute the praiseworthy impulses and desires for virtues, with the grace of God removed, to the naked free will: so that good and healthy efforts indeed cannot profit unless God helps.
However, they can begin, even if not inspired by God.
Chapter Four
Against Cassianus it is proven that the desire for health cannot be had without grace.
Cassianus's fourth definition: The beginnings of good wills sometimes come from the good of nature. Refuted, both from his first definition and from the Apostle, whose passage, "For to will is present with me," is vindicated from a wrong interpretation.
Then, to define more clearly what man has from free will and what he receives from God's grace, you add and say:
For no one enjoys health whenever they want, nor are they freed from the disease of illness according to their own will.
You thus teach that a man cannot grasp health by himself but has the desire for health from himself, and that he comes to the doctor by his own will alone; that this coming is not also from the doctor.
As if the soul itself does not languish and does not seek a remedy for its own body.
But the whole man, from and with the soul itself, falls into the depth of his own misery, where it pleases him to lie before he receives knowledge of his calamity from the doctor, always loving his errors and embracing falsehoods instead of truths.
The first step to his salvation is that he begins to displease himself and hates the old weakness of his condition: the next is that he desires to be healed and knows by whom he should be healed (see response to the 6 objections of the Gauls).
These precede his healing in such a way that they are instilled in him by the one who is going to heal him: so that, since these things cannot be present in him in vain, he seems to be saved by merit, not by grace.
Then you add: To make it clearer, the beginnings of good wills sometimes come from the good of nature, which is granted by the Creator, but they cannot reach the completion of virtues unless they are directed by God.
The Apostle is a witness, saying: For to will is present with me, but to perform what is good I do not find.
Therefore, according to this definition, you falsely said before that not only the beginnings of good acts but also of good thoughts are from God; who both begins what is good and carries it out and completes it in us.
But this can in no way be false in any part: contrary ideas ought not to have been inferred; what you rightly professed to begin from grace, you later confirmed that we have it through the good of nature and free will.
The blessed Apostle indeed said: For to will is present with me, but to perform what is good I do not find, Romans 7:18.
But he also said: Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think of anything as being from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from God.
And he also said: For it is God who works in you both to will and to do, Philippians 2:13.
The apostle writes to us, on your behalf, to work for the good will Philippians 2:13.
Therefore, the apostle is not contradicting himself.
But when the good will has been granted to us, we do not immediately find the ability to act, unless we ask, seek, and knock.
The one who gave the desire also provides the fulfillment.
The voice of the one saying: "For the desire to do what is good is with me, but I cannot carry it out" Romans 7:18, is that of someone called, and already under grace: who delights in God's law according to the inner self, but sees another law at work in his body, waging war against the law of his mind and making him a prisoner of the law of sin Romans 7:22 and 23.
Although he has received the knowledge of right willing, he does not find in himself the strength to do what he desires; until, for the good will he has taken up, he deserves to find the power of virtues he seeks.
Chapter Five
The Fifth Definition of Cassian: Opposing views should be accepted at the same time; both that good will is born from grace, and that grace depends on good will.
Cassian's opinion attributes error to Catholics as well as Pelagians.
It is refuted by the definitions of the supreme pontiffs and councils.
1.
After this, you present many testimonies to show that free will is sometimes strong and sometimes weak:
as if there were some who could fulfill what others cannot do without God's help;
or that a person receives a command for no other reason than to seek divine assistance.
You conclude and say: And so these things are somewhat mixed up and confused, so that it is a great question among many as to which depends on which:
whether God has mercy on us because we have begun to show good will, or whether we attain the beginning of good will because God has mercy on us.
Many believe each of these things and assert them more strongly, being involved in various and opposing errors.
Here, it seems to you, what was mixed up is now clear; and what could not be explained is now resolved.
You define that there are two opposing errors, in which those who do not know what to hold between free will and grace are entangled.
And in one, you place those who say that God has mercy on us because we have shown the beginnings of good will; undoubtedly referring to the followers of Pelagian doctrine, who say that God's grace is given according to our merits:
and in the other, those who say that the beginnings of good will come from the mercy of God; meaning those who have defeated the enemies of grace.
So if it is an error to attribute the beginnings of good will to a person not divinely assisted, and it is an error to confess that the will is prepared by the Lord, where are we to be directed, so that we may avoid both?
2.
If we follow both, you say, we will acquiesce to no error.
You subject us to two errors, and as you understand it, double the wrongness:
by dividing you condemn, by mixing you justify.
By this law, by this rule, you could declare that those who say it is always necessary to lie are as wrong as those who define it is never necessary to lie (noting Cassian's 17th Conference, in which he teaches that it is sometimes permissible to lie);
but so that there is no sin in either, both should be followed:
because neither should falsehood always be avoided, nor truth always neglected.
Your opinion is entirely mistaken.
From two evils, one good cannot be made:
two vices do not produce one virtue:
two falsehoods do not make one truth.
What are equal in merit are not diminished by joining, but increase.
Therefore, those who assert that the beginnings of good will are generated by God's inspiration should not be condemned by that opinion, which argues...
Those who think that free will alone is sufficient without the help of grace are mistaken. One of these definitions was rejected by the Church, while the other was defended. Neither of them fits the covenant of this new testament in any way, being more corrupt than Catholicism and less corrected than Pelagianism.
Many, you say, believe each of these things and assert even more, entangled in various and contradictory errors.
So you prefer to condemn the victors with the heretics and to mark those with error who have driven out the error from the Church?
According to your judgment, which claims that the holy and faithful will is not from God in all men (as if you attribute much to grace by acknowledging that it works in the minds of some), Pope Innocent and the worthiest successor of Peter erred when he spoke of those who boast in free will:
"For what," he said, "should we think of their minds henceforth, who think they owe it to themselves that they are good?"
And again, when he wrote about the fall of the first man:
"For free will," he said, "once suffered, while using its goods too recklessly, fell into the depths of transgression and found no way to rise from there; deceived by its own freedom eternally, it would have lain oppressed by this ruin, unless the advent of Christ for his grace had lifted him."
The Eastern Bishops erred, in whose judgment Pelagius was compelled to anathematize those who say that God's grace is given according to our merits, so that he could be seen as Catholic (See the book of Pelagius' Acts chapters 14, 33-35). The African Bishops' Councils erred, which by their decrees established that both knowing what we ought to do and loving to do it are gifts of God: so that with charity building up, knowledge might not inflate, because as it is written of God, "He is the one who teaches man knowledge" (Psalms 94:10); and it is written (First John 4:7): "Charity is from God" (Carthage council, canons 4 and 5; see appendix p. 272). The two hundred and fourteen priests erred, who in the letter they prefaced to their constitutions, addressed the blessed Zosimus, bishop of the apostolic see: "We have established that the sentence against Pelagius and Celestius, pronounced through the venerable bishop Innocent from the see of the most blessed apostle Peter, should remain until the clearest confession is made."
They are kept by the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, not only to know, but also to do justice, helping us in every act; so that without it, we can have, think, say, or do nothing of true and holy piety.
The holy seat of blessed Peter erred, which speaks to the entire world through the mouth of Pope Zosimus: "However, by the instinct of God (for all good things should be referred to their author, from whom they originate), we have referred everything to the conscience of our brothers and fellow bishops."
The African bishops erred, writing back to the same Pope Zosimus, praising him for the healthiness of his judgment when they say: "However, what you stated in the letters that you took care to be sent to all the provinces, saying, 'By the instinct of God (for all good things should be referred to their author, from whom they originate), we have referred everything to the conscience of our brothers and fellow bishops,' we understood it to mean that you, in passing, cut off with the strict sword of truth those who exalt the freedom of human will against the help of God. For what did you do with such free will, if not refer everything to the conscience of our humility? And yet you wisely and faithfully saw and truthfully and confidently said that it was done by the instinct of God. Surely, because the will is prepared by the Lord, and that people may do good, He Himself touches the hearts of His children with paternal inspirations (Proverbs 8, according to the Septuagint). For all who are led by the Spirit of God, they are the children of God (Romans 8:14). So we do not feel that our will is lacking, and in all good motions of the human will, we do not doubt that His help prevails more."
Do you see your rules shattered by the strength of invincible constitutions, and in the structure of faith, the crooked and cracked joints, like the walls of Jericho, falling at the sound of priestly trumpets (Joshua 6:20)?
Chapter Five
Since the question of the origin of holy wills has been clearly defined against the Pelagians, Cassian wrongly, gathering the weapons of the erring, contends that free will is taken away by grace: when it is rather formed, governed, and ordered through it.
For when the question of the origin of holy wills, and the principles of faith and charity, was disputed between us and the Pelagians, the conflict was ended not with an uncertain victory nor a doubtful conclusion; so that we must still discuss the most unjust peace of this alliance of yours.
The enemy's army was defeated, the war was completed, we are victorious through Him who made power in His arm, who scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts, brought down the mighty from their thrones, and exalted the humble, filled the hungry with good things, and sent the rich away empty.
(Luke 1:52-53)
Through Him, who showing mercy to our fathers, remembered His holy covenant, and the oath He swore to our father Abraham, to grant us that we, being delivered from the hand of our enemies, might serve Him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before Him all our days.
(Luke 1:71)
Through Him, who gave us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.
(Second Corinthians 15:57)
Through Him, from whom we have received not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit who is from God, that we might know the things that have been freely given to us by God.
(First Corinthians 2:12)
Why do you strive to collect the shattered weapons of broken arguments?
Why, by reviving the ashes of an extinguished doctrine, do you try to kindle the scent of dying smoke into a living flame?
There is no danger to free will from the grace of God, nor is the will taken away, since the desire to do good is generated within it.
For if it is not to be considered ours because it is formed, governed, ordered, and imbued: then the children of God are stripped of liberty who are led by the Spirit of God.
(Romans 8:14)
They lose the strength of rational minds and are deprived of all praise for voluntary devotion, to whom is given the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, counsel and might, knowledge and piety, and the fear of the Lord.
(Isaiah 11:2)
Surely those who do not think they need these reforms have passed from the habit of old sickness into madness: they reject the remedy, cry out, rage, resist; but if they are children of the promise, they will rest and be healed.
CHAPTER VII.
Cassianus, confusing contradictory definitions, tries to illustrate his point with examples, suggesting that some can achieve certain things through free will without God's help, while others cannot without God's cooperation.
This is refuted by Scriptures, and it is shown that, like Matthew and Paul, the conversion of Zacchaeus and the thief on the cross is equally due to grace.
Also CHAP. XIII.
But now let us see what the sober disputant infers; who, in order to counter one fault with another, and to correct one error with another, confuses contradictory definitions with new art.
And in order to present this concoction to unsuspecting listeners, he tries to illustrate his mix with examples.
For he says Collation 13, Chapter 11:
"If we say that the beginning of a good will is ours, what about Paul the persecutor? What about Matthew the tax collector?
One was involved in the bloodshed and punishment of the innocent, the other in public violence and extortion, and both are drawn to salvation.
But if we say that the beginnings of good will are always inspired by God's grace, what do we say about Zacchaeus' faith?
What about the piety of the thief on the cross, who, by their own desire, forcefully entered the heavenly kingdom, anticipating the special call?"
Through this difference in the beginnings of good, he tries to prove that some can achieve certain things through free will without God's help, while others cannot without God's cooperation.
And he wants this to be understood from the slower obedience of some and the more eager consent of others.
As if where hardened unbelief submits to God and suddenly succumbs to the Gospel it long resisted, there the change in man is wrought by the hand of the Most High Psalm 76:11.
But where a willing listener embraces a calm exhortation or mere rumor without hesitation, the goodness of such a conversion is solely due to human will.
As if the power of God only draws those to the Son whom He has either rebuked with His voice, crushed with punishment, or terrified; but applies none of His power to the minds of those who run eagerly and with lively desire to the promises of their Redeemer.
But the Truth says: "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him" John 6:44.
Therefore, if no one comes unless drawn, all who come in any manner are drawn.
Also CHAP. XIV.
Thus, the contemplation of the elements and the beautiful order of all things in them draws one to God.
For the invisible things of Him, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made Romans 1:20.
The narrators of the deeds of history draw the mind of the listener; the reporters of divine works inflame the mind.
They recount the praises of the Lord and His power, and the wonderful things He has done
Psalm 77:4.
Fear draws us: For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom
Proverbs 1:7;
Psalm 111:10.
Joy draws us, because, I was glad when they said to me, "Let us go to the house of the Lord"
Psalm 121:1.
Desire draws us: because, My soul longs, yes, even faints for the courts of the Lord
Psalm 84:3.
Delight draws us: How sweet are Your words to my taste, sweeter than honey to my mouth
Psalm 119:103.
And who can understand or explain the feelings through which God’s visitation leads the human soul, so that what it once fled, it now follows; what it once hated, it now loves; what it once disdained, it now hungers for; and by a sudden miraculous change, what was once closed becomes open; what was once burdensome becomes light; what was once bitter becomes sweet; what was once obscure becomes clear?
All this is the work of one and the same Spirit, distributing to each one as He wills
First Corinthians 12:14.
For God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ
Second Corinthians 4:6,
that is, in the revelation of His Son, who is in the glory of the Father.
Therefore, the same one who shone in the heart of Matthew the tax collector and Paul when he was persecuting the Church, also shone in the heart of Zacchaeus and in the heart of the thief crucified with the Lord: unless perhaps the voice of the Lord was idle when He deigned to call Zacchaeus, who sought to see who Jesus was, saying: Zacchaeus, hurry and come down; for today I must stay at your house
Luke 19:5;
and He did not prepare Zacchaeus's heart, whose house He chose to stay in.
Finally, when everyone murmured, asking why He had gone to be the guest of a sinner, and Zacchaeus, already repenting, promised to give half of his goods to the poor and repay four times the amount of any fraud, the Lord said: Today salvation has come to this house, because he too is a son of Abraham.
And to make the cause of this salvation clear, He added: For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost
Luke 19:10;
so that we might know that the one who was saved was sought first.
In the justification of the thief, even if no signs of the working of grace were understood, would we not, along with all believers, also accept that he was drawn in? For the Lord said: All things have been delivered to Me by My Father
Luke 10:22;
and, when I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all people to Myself
John 12:32.
In the end, let him teach. Among all things, however, this one is either handed down or drawn out, as his own confession teaches; who, after blaspheming against Jesus Christ for some time, suddenly changed and said:  "Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom."   Luke twenty-three forty-two
But where such a great difference in conflicting voices in one man has originated, let the blessed Apostle instruct us and say:  "No one speaking in the Spirit of God says, 'Anathema Jesus'; and no one can say 'Lord Jesus,' except in the Holy Spirit."   First Corinthians twelve three
So that we do not doubt that in the will of the same man, it was from his own will that he blasphemed, and from the Holy Spirit that he believed.  Therefore, this disputant, in vain, wanted to adapt the inscrutable variety of one grace to his argument's definition; so that a portion of the justified is believed to come to Christ by the movements of their own will, but the resisting portion is dragged and compelled unwillingly:  since it is God who works all things in all, whether He wants to attract some in one way, and others in another way, to whom no one comes unless they are somehow attracted.   First Corinthians twelve six
CHAPTER VIII. Sixth Definition of Cassian: Free will and grace should be accepted together; that is, they are believed to equally contribute to salvation.
Divine authorities on grace are presented: and the reason why free will is not taken away by grace is given.
After this, he presents testimonies from Sacred History, showing that the observance of God's commandments and the fulfillment of virtues are attributed to divine grace.
We also readily confess this.
And having recalled examples such as Balaam, whom God transformed from cursing the Israelites to blessing them Numbers thirteen; and Abimelech, who was not allowed to sin against Rebecca Genesis twenty-six; and Joseph, who was sold by his brothers, whose evil intention God turned to good Genesis thirty-seven: he returns to confirm his definition.
He states that free will, which he claims to join with grace, is partially taken away from some of the human race, as much as it is in itself, and established in another part.
He says: Indeed, these two, that is, either grace or free will, seem to oppose each other; but both agree, and we should accept both equally with a sense of piety: lest by taking away one of these from man, we seem to exceed the rule of ecclesiastical faith.
The rule of ecclesiastical faith is, as the Apostle preaches: No one can say "Lord Jesus," unless in the Holy Spirit First Corinthians twelve verse three.
The rule of ecclesiastical faith is: What do you have that you did not receive? First Corinthians four verse seven.
If you did receive it, why do you boast as if you did not?
The rule of ecclesiastical faith is: By the grace of God, I am what I am, and His grace toward me was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me First Corinthians fifteen verse ten.
And, I obtained mercy so that I might be faithful First Corinthians seven verse twenty-five.
The rule of ecclesiastical faith is: We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellence of the power may be of God and not of us Second Corinthians four verse seven.
The rule of ecclesiastical faith is: By grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God, not of works, lest anyone should boast Ephesians two verse eight.
The rule of ecclesiastical faith is: Do not be intimidated by your adversaries, which is proof to them of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that from God: For to you it has been granted on behalf of Christ.
Because it has been granted to you for Christ's sake, not only to believe in Him but also to suffer for Him.
Philippians 1:28.
The ecclesiastical rule is:
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God who works in us both to will and to work for His good pleasure.
Philippians 2:12.
The ecclesiastical rule is:
Not that we are sufficient to think anything from ourselves, as if from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from God.
Second Corinthians 3:5.
This rule is confirmed by the Lord saying,
No one can come to me unless it has been given to him by my Father.
John 6:66.
And, All that the Father gives me will come to me.
John 6:37.
And, Without me you can do nothing.
John 15:5, 16.
And, You did not choose me, but I chose you.
Luke 10:22.
And, No one knows the Son except the Father; nor does anyone know the Father except the Son, and he to whom the Son wills to reveal Him.
Matthew 11:27.
And, Just as the Father raises the dead, so the Son also gives life to whom He wills.
John 5:21.
And, Blessed are you, Simon Barjona, because flesh and blood did not reveal this to you, but my Father who is in heaven.
Matthew 16:17.
This rule takes away the will from no human; because the power of grace does not work in wills so that they do not exist, but that they may be made good from evil, and faithful from unfaithful; and those who were darkness of themselves may become light in the Lord.
What was dead may be brought to life, what was lying down may be raised, what was lost may be found.
This is in all men who are delivered from the power of darkness and transferred to the kingdom of the Son of God's love, without exception of any person, we believe to be the work of the grace of the Savior.
Because, as this same one probably, but not definitively, determined, we say and defend that not only the beginning of good actions but also of good thoughts is from God, who inspires us with the beginnings of a holy will and grants the strength and opportunity to achieve what we rightly desire.
For every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights.
James 1:17.
Who begins good things, and continues; and perfects them in us.
If the author had remained in this sentiment, he would not have exceeded the ecclesiastical rule; nor would he be at the same time opposed to free will and ungrateful to the grace of God.
Of which two while indicating one in Paul and Matthew, another in Zacchaeus and the thief, he does not understand that in those he took away free will, in these he took away grace.
Chapter Nine
Against Cassian, it is proven from Scriptures and the Church's definitions that the beginning of good will comes from grace. The first man, created without sin and able to persist in good if he wanted, departed from good by his free will. After sin, nothing remained in him except what pertains to temporal life. Into what deep evil the entire human nature was submerged by his transgression. Cassian's seventh definition: Adam, after the transgression, gained knowledge of evil but did not lose the knowledge of good. Refuted.
Then he added: For when God sees us wanting to turn to good, He comes to meet us, guides, and strengthens us. For at the sound of your cry, as soon as He hears it, He will answer you (Isaiah 30:19): and, Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver you, and you will glorify me (Psalm 50:15).
Who does not see that this teaching assigns merit to free will, so that grace precedes it and serves it by rendering what is due, not by granting a gift? This definition was condemned in the synod of bishops in Palestine, even with Pelagius condemning it.
For in the person who begins to want good and desires to depart from iniquity and error, we profess that this is worked by the grace of God. For the steps of a man are ordered by the Lord, and He delights in his way (Psalm 37:23); and, Every way of a man is right in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs the hearts (Proverbs 21:2); and, A man's steps are directed by the Lord; how then can anyone understand their own way (Proverbs 20:24)?
And what the Apostle says: For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry, Abba, Father (Romans 8:15).
After this, he continues, and says (Conference 13, chapter 12): For it is not to be believed that God made man in such a way that he could never want or be able to do good. Otherwise, He did not permit him free will, if He only allowed him to want and be able to do evil, but neither to want nor to be able to do good.
And how will that sentence of the Lord stand, pronounced after the transgression of the first man, Behold, the man has become like one of us, knowing good and evil (Genesis 3:22)?
For it is not to be thought that he was entirely ignorant of good before. Otherwise, he must be acknowledged to have been formed as a certain irrational and senseless animal: which is sufficiently absurd and by all means alien to the Catholic faith. Rather, according to the statement of the wisest Solomon, God made man upright (Ecclesiasticus 7:30): that is, so that he might continually enjoy the knowledge of good: but they have sought out many schemes.
For they became, as it is said, knowing good and evil. Therefore, Adam conceived after the transgression.
She had not yet acquired the knowledge of evil; however, she did not lose the knowledge of good that she had received.
There is no doubt that the first man, in whom the nature of all humans was created, was made upright and free from every vice.
He received free will in such a way that if he did not abandon God, who was helping him, he could remain in the good things he had naturally received because he wanted to.
By the merit of voluntary perseverance, he could reach that blessedness where he neither wanted to fall into worse things nor could he.
But with that free will, by which he remained good as long as he wanted to, he departed from the law set before him.
He did not fear the punishment of death that was announced to him, abandoning God and following the devil, rebelling against the Lord, the Savior, and obeying the enemy, the destroyer.
"Therefore, Adam was, and in him, we all were; Adam perished, and in him, all perished" (Ambrose, Book VII on Luke Chapter 15).
Blessed Ambrose said this truthfully, just as Truth itself said, "The Son of Man came to seek and to save what was lost" (Luke 19:10).
For in that ruin of universal transgression, neither the substance nor the will of human nature was taken away.
But it was stripped of the light and honor of virtues, which it had been deprived of by the deceit of the envious one.
Having lost those things through which it could have reached eternal and unlosable incorruption of body and soul, what remained for it except what pertains to temporal life, which is entirely of condemnation and punishment?
Therefore, those born in Adam must be reborn in Christ, so that no one is found in that generation which perished.
For if the descendants of Adam naturally acted in those virtues in which Adam was before sin, they would not be by nature children of wrath (Ephesians 2:3), they would not be darkness (Ephesians 5:8), nor under the power of darkness (Colossians 1:13), and they would not need the grace of the Savior.
Because they would not be good in vain, nor would they be deprived of the reward of justice; having those goods, the loss of which made the first parents deserve to be exiled from paradise.
But now, since no one can escape eternal death without the sacrament of regeneration, is it not clearly evident from the uniqueness of this remedy how deeply the nature of the entire human race has been plunged into evil by the transgression of the one in whom all sinned (Romans 5:12), and whatever he lost, they lost?
He lost, first of all, faith, he lost self-control, he lost charity, he was stripped of wisdom and understanding, he lacked counsel and strength.
And wickedly pursuing higher things, he was cast down from the knowledge of truth and the piety of obedience: without even the fear left to him, so that he might avoid the forbidden things out of fear of punishment, who did not abstain out of love for justice.
Therefore, free will, that is, the spontaneous desire for what pleases oneself, when it despised the use of the good things it had received and the supports of its happiness became worthless to it, it directed its insane desire to the experience of transgression, drank the poison of all vices, and soaked the entire nature of man with the drunkenness of its intemperance.
Hence, before digesting the fatal cruelty by eating the flesh of the Son of Man and drinking his blood, his memory totters.
He makes errors in judgment, wavers in his steps, and is in no way fit to choose and desire that good which he has willingly deprived himself of. Just as he could fall without God pushing him, he cannot rise without God lifting him up.
Therefore, it is not correct to say: For it should not be believed that God made man in such a way that he would never want or be able to do good.
As if we were saying that this weakness of man was created by the Creator, and not contracted by man as a result of sin.
Therefore, whoever thinks it follows that if free will is said to be blinded, the blindness itself should be attributed to the creator of nature, wants to persuade us that free will is as sound in Adam's descendants as it was in Adam before the sin: which we consider to be quite contrary to the Catholic faith.
For what was harmed by sin if not that from which the sin came? Unless perhaps it is said that punishment passed onto Adam's descendants, not guilt: which is completely false, and therefore is not said.
It is extremely impious to think this about God's justice, that He would want the children to be damned along with the guilty.
Therefore, guilt is evident where punishment is not hidden, and the fellowship of sin is convicted by the sharing of punishment; so that what is human misery is not from the Creator's institution, but from the judge's retribution.
That statement was inappropriately made, and contrary to the sense of all commentators, which connected it to prove the soundness of free will, saying: And how will that sentence of the Lord stand after the transgression of the first man, "Behold, Adam has become like one of us, knowing good and evil" (Genesis 3:22)?
As if the devil had promised Adam the truth, and Adam, by transgressing God's command, had advanced in the likeness of God, and God had pronounced that this had been conferred upon him: when in these words it was rather indicated what he had not achieved, who, having entered the path of pride, lost what he had when he desired what he had not received.
Moreover, in the very conclusion of this sense, there is a sin, when it is said: Therefore, Adam conceived after the transgression, the knowledge of evil which he had not had; but the knowledge of good, which he had received, he did not lose.
Adam had the knowledge of good then, when he faithfully kept God's holy command with a loyal heart, and remained just in the image of his Creator, not forgetting His law.
But after he sold himself, that is, the image and temple of God, to his deceiver, he lost the knowledge of good because he lost a good conscience.
For injustice drove out justice, pride destroyed humility, lust crushed self-control, infidelity took away faith, and captivity took away freedom: nor could any portion of virtues remain there, where such a crowd of vices had invaded.
For no one can serve two masters (Luke 16:13); and: Whoever commits sin is a slave of sin (John 8:34); and, By whom a person is overcome, by him he is also brought into bondage (Second Peter 2:19).
No one, however, serves except with some liberty; and no one is free except with some servitude, as the Apostle says (Romans 6:20), When you were...
If you were of sin, you were free from righteousness.
So what benefit did you have then in those things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
But now, having been freed from sin and having become servants of God, you have your fruit leading to sanctification and the end, eternal life.
Therefore, he who serves the devil is free from God; but he who, having been freed, serves God is free from the devil.
This shows that bad freedom could be had from the defect of human will, but good freedom could not be received without the help of the liberator.
Chapter Ten
The passage from the Apostle in Romans 2:14, about the Gentiles who do by nature the things of the law, is explained and defended.
There is a certain wisdom in unbelievers from the remnants of nature created by God, but no movement of goodwill exists without the Holy Spirit.
CHAPTER 22.
But lest it might seem that this calamity of the first man has passed on to his progeny, which has the whole judgment of all human nature intact, this teacher is about to prove by the example of the Gentiles and thus says (Collation 13, chapter 12):
Finally, the fact that the human race did not lose the knowledge of good after the transgression of Adam is very clearly declared by the Apostle's statement, who says in Romans 2:14,
"When the Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature the things required by the law, these not having the law are a law to themselves, who show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness and their thoughts alternately accusing or even defending them, on the day when God will judge the secrets of men."
If the Apostle speaks of those who are called from the foreskin and, when they were far off, were made near (Ephesians 2:13), believing in him who once did not have mercy, now has mercy (First Peter 2:10), and justifying the circumcision by faith, and the foreskin through faith (Romans 3:30), made two into one in himself, breaking down the wall of enmity (Ephesians 2:14) of Jews and Gentiles, in one new man making peace; concluding all in unbelief, so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe (Galatians 3:22):
If, I say, the Apostle speaks of those in whose hearts God writes the new covenant with his finger, that is, the Holy Spirit, so that they naturally perform the fullness of the law and acts of charity, with their nature reformed and renewed;
what does the novelty of this most arrogant opinion help, since the reconciliation of enemies can only be attributed to the grace of the Mediator? For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his grace (Romans 3:23).
Therefore, grace is the glory of God, not the merit of the liberated. For who has first given to him, that it should be repaid to him? Nothing of good work comes from the dead, nothing of justice proceeds from the wicked: all their salvation is by grace; and therefore, it is the glory of God, so that whoever glories, may glory in him whose glory he needed (Romans 11:35).
But if, which this disputant prefers to be understood, these things are said of those who, alien from Christian grace, established certain things similar to the commandments of the law by their own judgment, understanding that the morals of cities and the concord of peoples could not otherwise be maintained, unless both rewards for right actions and penalties for sins were decreed:
This authority from the book of Ecclesiasticus is omitted by some editions but is found in the manuscripts. In other editions, it reads, from wisdom itself from God. In one manuscript, it reads, held primacy among all nations: and in another, these final words are missing.
I went to Jacob, and I found it. Therefore, as it is said by the Wisdom of God itself,
"I came forth from the mouth of the Most High, and I held the first place among all peoples; I sought rest in Jacob, and I found it."
So who would doubt that this wisdom is preserved in human nature for the benefit of temporal life, as it was created by God?
For if the rational mind's ability did not extend even to ordering earthly matters, nature would not be corrupted but extinct.
Even though it excels in the most excellent arts and all disciplines of human learning
Sirach 24:7, it cannot justify itself: because it uses its good things wrongly, and without the worship of the true God, it is condemned for impiety and uncleanness, and what it thinks defends it, actually accuses it.
Therefore, since Paul states that no flesh is justified by the works of the law
Romans 3:20; and that in Christ, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything, but a new creation
Galatians 5:6; why does he instruct the impious liberty of unbelievers with natural goods and want to justify it by their own principles?
Why does he define the nakedness of the transgressor's knowledge as suitable for the renewal of the damaged old way?
As if this knowledge, whether obtained from the remaining works of nature or sought from the teaching of the law, could by its own understanding ensure that we love to do what we know should be done: or that there is any movement of good will, except that which is created by the breath of charity diffused through the Holy Spirit.
For without faith it is impossible to please
Hebrews 11:6: and,
"Whatever is not of faith is sin" Romans 14:23: and, in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything; but faith working through love
Galatians 5:6.
Chapter Eleven
Free will neither has the desire for good nor the ability to do it, except through grace.
Why humans are commanded to do things which they cannot find the ability to do in their own nature. The eighth definition from Cassian: To human nature, not only what is evil should be ascribed. Human merits are nothing without grace.
1. After this, in the conclusion of the testimonies which he wanted to prove, that those who are called deaf and blind through prophetic rebuke can, from the faculty of nature, open their ears to hear and their eyes to see (as if the Lord does not say about them, "And I will give them another heart, and a new spirit I will give them; and I will remove the heart of stone from their flesh, and give them a heart of flesh; that they may walk in my statutes, and keep my ordinances, and do them" (Ezekiel 11:19 and 36:26)); he adds and says (Conference 13, chapter 12):
Finally, to signify that the ability for good is in them, rebuking them, he said, "And why do you not judge for yourselves what is right?" (Luke 12:57). He would not have said this unless he knew they could discern what is right by natural judgment. Now, he ascribes not only the desire for good but also the ability to free will: as if the understanding is demanded from them, justice is required, because they can bring these forth from the good of nature without God's gifts. These things, however, are commanded to man so that from the command itself, which indicates what he has received, he may recognize that he lost it by his own fault; and that the demand is not unjust, because he is not capable of repaying what he owes; but let him flee from the letter that kills to the spirit that gives life, and seek from grace the ability he does not find in nature. If he does this, great is the mercy of God: if he does not, just is the punishment for sin.
2. Then to the fullness of the preceding discourse, he pronounces a regular sentence, saying:
Hence, we must beware lest we refer all the merits of the saints to God in such a way that we ascribe nothing but what is evil and perverse to human nature. What is clearer, what is more expressly defined according to the teaching of Pelagius and Celestius by any of their disciples? They say, the grace of God is given according to our merits: and the same say, the grace of God is not given for individual actions: here he concluded both blasphemies within one sentence, saying, We must beware lest we refer all the merits of the saints to God in such a way that we ascribe nothing but what is evil and perverse to human nature. Therefore, he wants there to be many merits of humans, which are not bestowed by the largess of grace, which
Some natural wealth must be attributed to gifts from above. He wants us to not receive God's grace for every single action and, consequently, not to always pray for every good deed. And so, it will follow that there is no merit in God's gifts, since God always helps without merit in all things. Or if even in the things that God gives, some merits are considered, it must also be acknowledged that they could have been acquired by one's own ability. Therefore, in some cases, we must be helped so that it is made more possible by grace what was not impossible by nature.
Behold, in this brief statement, there is not just a double but a multiple connection of many impieties, which, if examined with more scrupulous diligence, will not be shown to be free from the chain of condemned error.
Chapter Twelve
It is demonstrated more clearly that Cassian's view, which claims that pious thoughts and holy intentions can arise from natural wisdom without God's inspiration, is incorrect.
Contrary to this, it is shown through the interpretation of the passage he misused and the addition of other arguments, that pious thoughts do not originate from free will without God's inspiration.
Human goodwill is indeed his own, but it is only conceived through God's inspiration.
Likewise, human conversion, although not without his participation, does not begin from him.
But so that we do not seem to be acting on suspicions or probing the hidden meanings beyond the words, let the following clarify what is added to what is already known.
Thus, the one who among the principles of his argument had said, "Not only the beginning of actions but also of good thoughts is from God; who inspires in us the beginnings of holy will, and grants us the strength and opportunity to carry out what we rightly desire," now, wishing to prove that religious thoughts and holy intentions, conceived without any inspiration from God, can arise from natural wisdom, quotes the words of Solomon, who said:
"My father David wanted to build a house for the name of the Lord, the God of Israel. But the Lord said to my father David: 'You did well to have it in your heart to build a house for my name; however, you will not build the house for my name (First Kings 8:17).'"
Then, to show how this should be understood, the author himself adds: "So, this thought and this plan of King David, should it be said to be good and from God, or bad and from man? For if that thought was good and from God, why is the effect denied by the one who inspired it? But if it was bad and from man, why is it praised by the Lord? It remains, therefore, that it should be believed to be both good and from man. In this way, we can judge our daily thoughts. For it was not granted only to David to think good from himself, nor is it denied to us to naturally think or understand anything good."
In no way can this testimony and argument prove that pious thoughts arise solely from free will and not from God's inspiration.
For David's will, which was certainly good, is not to be believed as not from God, just because the Lord wanted the temple to be built not by him but by his son.
Therefore, it must be asked from what spirit this desire of his will proceeded, namely from that spirit of God, in which he said, "I will not enter the tent of my house or go up to the bed of my couch, or give sleep to my eyes or slumber to my eyelids, or rest to my temples, until I find a place for the Lord, a dwelling for the Mighty One of Jacob (Psalm 132:3)."
While the Prophet desired this, he did not ignore that the true and perfect temple was to be established by him who, while being the Son of God, was also made the son of David; and who, when he saw the temple constructed by Solomon, said, "Destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days." But he was speaking of the temple of his body (John 2:19 and 21).
So that this temple, which was being prepared in Christ and in the Church, might be prefigured, it was appropriate that not David, but the son of David, should be chosen for its construction, so that through the son of man it might be signified that the Son of God and man was to come.
The relationship between God and man, and through the dissolvable temple, would indicate the incorruptible tabernacle. For the construction of which the will of David was approved, and the work was transferred to him whose person more suited that image.
And so it was from God that David desired this, and it was from God that Solomon did this.
To make this clearer with examples, let us look for where God
did not want what men wanted to do with God willing.
The Lord commanded the apostles, saying,
Go, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you (Matthew 28:19).
When the apostles heard this, without a doubt they did not receive these words merely as empty sounds through their physical ears, but the power of the living word ignited an unquenchable flame of love in their hearts, by which they ardently desired to preach the Gospel of Christ to all nations.
But when they were forbidden to speak the word in Asia and when they attempted to go into Bithynia, they were prevented by the Spirit of Jesus (Acts 16:6 and 7): did they not have this desire from God, even though they wanted to convert the hearts of those to faith whom God, by his hidden judgment, did not want to hear the Gospel at that time? Or when the Church prays daily for its enemies, that is, for those who have not yet believed in God, does it not do this from the Spirit of God? Who would say otherwise, except someone who does not do this or who thinks that faith is not a gift from God? And yet, what is prayed for all is not obtained for all. Nor is there injustice with God, who often does not grant what is asked for, which he has granted to ask for.
Therefore, it must be acknowledged that good will, that is, by which one adheres to God, is indeed proper to man, but it must be confessed to be conceived by God's inspiration. For since no one is good except God alone (Luke 18:19), what kind of good would it be that does not have a good author? For the nature of humanity, whose creator is God, even after transgression retains substance, form, life, sense, reason, and other goods of body and soul, which are not absent even in the wicked and vicious, but does not have the perception of true goodness in these, which can adorn mortal life but cannot confer eternal life. For it is not unknown how much the Greek schools and Roman eloquence, etc.
Romans 1:21, and their foolish hearts were darkened. Those who used themselves as guides to know the truth were misguided.
Therefore, if anyone, ashamed of the distressing vanities and deceitful madness, realizes that whatever they embraced as light and life is actually darkness and death, and tries to withdraw from these things; this turning away is not from themselves, though it is not without themselves; nor do they strive towards the beginnings of salvation by their own strength. But this is the work of the hidden and powerful grace of God, which, removing the ashes of earthly opinions and dead works, stirs up the buried heart's torch and ignites it with the desire for truth: not to subdue a reluctant person, but to make them eager for submission; not to drag an ignorant person, but to lead one who understands and follows.
For free will remains, which God certainly created with man, and from the vanities and desires into which they flowed by neglecting God's law, it is changed, not by itself, but by the Creator; so that whatever is restored in it for the better, it is not without Him who heals, nor except by Him who heals; of whom we are a new creation and a new formation, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand so that we might walk in them Ephesians 2:10.
Chapter Twelve
Ninth Definition of Cassian: Every soul naturally has seeds of virtues, implanted by the Creator. Refuted because original sin overturns this. Virtues in the wicked are not true, and all their works are unclean. No principles of virtues or merits exist in us before grace. In the minds of the wicked, although there are many praiseworthy things, they are not true virtues. Refutes what the Assembler tried to prove from the apocryphal book of the Shepherd, that a man, even before grace, is equally inclined to good and evil.
Now, let us see where the intention of the debater is leading. It cannot be doubted, he says (Conferences Thirteen, chapter twelve), that every soul naturally has seeds of virtues, implanted by the benefit of the Creator.
But unless these are awakened by the help of God, they cannot reach the growth of perfection. As the blessed Apostle says, neither the one who plants is anything, nor the one who waters, but God who gives the growth.
Moreover, the book called the Shepherd teaches very clearly that man has the freedom to choose in any direction. It is said that two angels adhere to each of us, one good and one bad, and it is in the choice of man to decide whom to follow.
Therefore, free will always remains in man, which can either neglect or love the grace of God.
If it cannot be doubted that every soul naturally has seeds of virtues implanted by the benefit of the Creator: only Adam transgressed, and no one sinned in his sin; we were not conceived in any iniquities, and our mothers did not bear us in any sins (Psalm fifty-one, verse seven); we were not by nature children of wrath, nor were we under the power of darkness (Ephesians two, verse three); with virtues naturally remaining in us, we were rather born children of peace and light (Colossians one, verse thirteen).
Let the insidious deception of false doctrine be far from the minds of the pious. Virtues cannot dwell with vices. For what partnership, says the Apostle, has righteousness with lawlessness? Or what fellowship has light with darkness? (Second Corinthians six, verse fourteen)
For virtue is primarily God: for whom having virtue is the same as being virtue. When we share in this, Christ dwells in us, who is the power of God and the wisdom of God (First Corinthians one, verse twenty-four); faith, hope, charity, self-control, understanding, counsel, fortitude, and other virtues dwell in us. When we depart from this good, everything contrary arises in us.
For when beauty leaves, what succeeds but deformity? When wisdom leaves, what remains but foolishness? When justice does not reign, what dominates but iniquity?
Therefore, the seeds of virtues that were implanted by the benefit of the Creator were overturned by the transgression of the first parent; and they cannot be had unless restored by the one who gave them.
Human nature is reformable by its maker, and it is capable of the goods it had: so that through the mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, it can recover what it lost in the very thing that remains in it.
What remains, however, is a rational soul, which is not virtue, but the dwelling place of virtue. By participating in wisdom, justice, and mercy, we are not wisdom, justice, or mercy; but we are wise, just, and merciful.
These goods, though our rational part is occupied by vices, and the unclean spirit has invaded the temple of God as we transgress, can nevertheless return to the rational part, through him who casts out the prince of this world (John twelve, verse thirty-one), and binds the strong man, and plunders his goods (Mark three, verse twenty-seven), and with the ruler of the world driven out...
The law of the Spirit, Thus in the manuscripts of Corbie, Reims, and Jol., along with Mainz and Venice. But Lyon and more recent ones say, grants us the Spirit. gives the Spirit who is from God, so that we may understand the things given to us by God. First Corinthians 2:12. But if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, they do not belong to Him. Romans 8:9.
Another Chapter 28. But I think this person is deceived by the appearance of truth and errs in the semblance of false virtues, while believing that those good things which can only be had as a gift from God can also be found in the souls of the impious. Editions of Lyon, Louvain, Douai, and Cologne think so. Because many of them are followers of justice, temperance, continence, and benevolence. All these are not possessed in vain or without benefit, and they gain much honor and glory in this life from them. However, because in these pursuits they serve not God but the devil, although they have a temporary reward from vain praise, they do not belong to the truth of those blessed virtues. Editions of Mainz and Venice also. And so it is very clear that no virtue dwells in the souls of the impious, but all their works are unclean and polluted, having wisdom that is not spiritual but natural; not heavenly but earthly; not Christian but diabolical; not from the Father of lights but from the prince of darkness. Thus in the manuscripts of Corbie, Reims, and Jol., along with editions of Mainz and Venice. But Lyon and later editions say, through those very things which they would not have except by the gift of God, they are subjected to him, etc. While even those things which they would not have except by the gift of God, they subject to him who first departed from God.
Therefore, whoever says that without any work of grace, the seeds of all virtues naturally exist in every soul, what does he labor to show except that from these seeds Manuscripts of Corbie, Jol., and editions of Mainz and Venice say some seeds. some sprouts of merits precede the grace of God? Finally, to seem to attribute something to grace, he says: To reach the growth of perfection, these seeds cannot arrive without the help of God: so that the help of God is encouragement and teaching, and the mind, which is rich in the seeds of virtues, uses the ability it possesses; needing only to be aided to reach the heights of those virtues whose beginnings it knows to exist in itself.
In the recognition of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has now given us everything related to life and godliness through His divine power Second Peter 1:2.
Did he say, "Who has excited within us the seeds of virtues that we naturally possessed with His help?"
But he said, "Who has now given us everything that pertains to life and godliness."
By saying this, if the beginning of virtue is placed in nature, what is there that has not been given by Him who has given everything? Therefore, the blessed Paul also said: "What do you have that you did not receive? And if you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not?" First Corinthians 4:7.
Therefore, everything that pertains to life and godliness, we do not have by nature, which is corrupted; but we have received it by grace, which restores nature. Nor should we think that the principles of virtues are in natural treasures, because many praiseworthy things are also found in the minds of the impious. These indeed come from nature; but since they have departed from Him who created nature, they cannot be virtues. For what is illuminated by light is light; and what lacks that light is darkness.
Because the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God First Corinthians 3:19.
And so it is a vice that is thought to be a virtue, since it is foolishness that is thought to be wisdom.
How can it be that those who boast in the seeds of natural virtues, which they themselves magnify, submit those virtues to the teaching that says, "If anyone among you thinks he is wise, let him become a fool so that he may become wise" First Corinthians 3:18?
and, "For since in the wisdom of God, the world through wisdom did not know God, it pleased God through the foolishness of preaching to save those who believe" First Corinthians 1:21.
What about that knowledge and presumption of wisdom that considers itself more awkward and laughable, unless the Spirit of God has subdued the pride of the arrogant and destroyed those arguments that resisted the unknown truth with dogged eloquence by the power of His grace: so that the seed of the word may take root in the plowed soil of the heart, and God's cultivation may produce fruits worthy of eternal barns?
However, that testimony is of no authority which he inserted into his argument from the Shepherd's booklet, from which he wanted to show the contrary suggestions between the good and bad angel.
The persuasions, thus every person is entrusted to their natural judgment and own discretion, so that they have no more protection from God than danger from the devil.
He added the rule of his definition, saying: And therefore free will always remains in a person, which can either neglect or love the grace of God.
In this view, even what he said, that free will always remains in a person, is, in some part, uncertain. Indeed, many thousands of infants assumed into the kingdom of God, or excluded from the kingdom of God, receive or lose the grace of God without any exercise of their own will. And many who are completely foolish and senseless are rescued from the bonds of eternal death through the sacrament of regeneration.
Yet let us accept this statement as such, that this definition properly pertains to those who can use free will. Is this freedom so free, that it has as much displeasure to neglect the grace of God as it has pleasure to love it? Has the icy rigor of ancient unbelief been relaxed by no warmth of the midday spirit? And has the numbness of the bound mind from its own coldness been kindled? As the Lord says,   (Luke 12:49), no spark has reached the cold heart, and the dead ashes have kindled into the flame of love by themselves?
Nothing like this has happened among these lovers of grace, as those experienced who said,   (Luke 24:32). Nor was that done among them which was done in Lydia, a seller of purple from the city of Thyatira, who among the women to whom the apostle was preaching there, is shown to have believed alone at that time,   (Acts 16:14).
And according to this view, the safety and power of free will are such that they have love, which is at the summit of all virtues, not as a gift from God, but solely from their own will. What then is repaired in the soul by its builder? Or by what generosity of grace will it be made more adorned, if those things without which the gifts cannot be of benefit are its own?
But the Apostle, who declares that without love, not works of miracles, not knowledge, not faith, not prophecy, not the distribution of...
Riches alone don't help, nor does enduring the harshest punishments.
First Corinthians 13:2-3 says, "If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing."
Love itself is not silent: "Because the love of God has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us"
Romans 5:5.
And, "Peace," he says, "to the brothers with love and faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ"
Ephesians 6:23.
Saint John the Apostle also instructs us on how we have begun to share in this good. "Beloved," he says, "let us love one another, for love is from God"
First John 4:7.
And lest we might think that love is called from God because of this affection, he says a little later, "Not that we loved God, but that He loved us"
First John 4:10, and again, "We love God because He first loved us"
First John 4:19.
Therefore, let the utmost poverty recognize this: what is rightly said of any goods is much more rightly said of the one without whom all goods are useless;
"For what do you have that you did not receive? And if you received it, why do you boast as if you did not receive it?"
First Corinthians 4:7.
Chapter Fourteen
Cassian attempts to demonstrate the strength of free will.
Cassian's Tenth Definition: Job overcame the devil by his own strength, not by the aid of grace, except in the sense that God did not grant the tempter more power than He knew Job had the strength to resist.
Cassian's deceit: he begins his discussion by praising the Catholic view of grace but later attacks it.
He gradually descends into Pelagian errors.
After this, however, when he had attributed so much to man before grace, as to make it seem most beneficial for him to have grace, he added some perplexing and confusing statements to demonstrate the strength of free will.
And regarding the strengths already granted to him, he wants to assert that what is naturally inherent in him is fortified, so that what he accomplished with God's help is something he began by the freedom of his own will.
However, let us pass over these tolerably: for we also say that free will, which we call the inclination of good will and the beginning of faith, is conceived by the operation of grace, so that by these things which are given without any preceding merit, he may deserve the promises made to those who will work, always asking from Him the ability to do something good, who said, "Without me you can do nothing" John 15:5.
Let us therefore pass over these matters and reconsider what he said about the sufferings of Saint Job.
For he says: "We read that divine justice provided for Job, its most tested athlete, when the devil sought him for a one-on-one contest.
If Job had fought against the enemy not by his own strength but solely by the protecting grace of God, and if, without any virtue of his own patience, he had endured those multiple and cruel temptations and calamities solely by divine assistance, how could the devil not more justly have repeated his slanderous accusation, 'Does Job fear God for nothing?
Have you not put a hedge around him and his household and everything he has?
But stretch out your hand and strike everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your face' Job 1:9.
But since the slanderous enemy dared not repeat any such complaint after the conflict, he confesses that he was defeated not by God's power but by Job's own strength.
Although it is to be believed that God's grace did not entirely fail him, as it granted the tempter as much power as it knew Job had the strength to resist, it did not protect him from the attacks to such an extent that it left no room for human virtue; but it ensured only that the most violent enemy did not overwhelm his soul by making him mad and senseless, burdening him with an unequal and unjust weight of the conflict.
Who would believe that these things could be preached among Catholics by Catholics unless what is often defended in domestic discussions is also read in writings?
Do all men have such a dim view of intelligence, and has the spirit of knowledge and piety departed from all the children of the Church, that they do not blush to introduce...
Let's ascribe it to nature. And so that we would not believe that any nature lost its virtues in the transgression of Adam, you defined that the souls of all people are as whole by nature as the soul of the first man was before sin, by saying:
"Therefore, it cannot be doubted that every soul naturally has the seeds of virtues, inserted by the Creator's benefit."
Considering, therefore, these definitions of yours, it is not hidden how much you have deviated from the soundness of that opinion, in which by falsely preaching what should be attributed to grace, you wanted to win the judgments of Catholic ears, who, assured by the promise's preface, would easily accept the following if they liked the first.
Chapter Fifteen
How much power Cassian attributes to free will.
Job, in his struggle with the devil, is thought to have won by his own strength.
It is proven that Job won with God's help.
The strength of endurance comes only from God's grace.
Cassian's error: Job had the strength to resist from free will, not from grace.
But so far, so that you do not seem to entirely deviate from the set rule, you transferred the principles of virtues and merits from free will to grace, admitting that the voluntary movements of good desires cannot be advanced or completed without God's help.
But now, distancing God further and separating Him from the sustenance of man, you attribute such power to free will that it not only endures the loss of many possessions and the bitter end of the entire family and relationships with equanimity, but also overcomes the unspeakable torments of its own body by the resolve of naked will.
And to leave no doubt in your argument, you set up the example of holy Job, who, you assert, contended against that notable cruelty of diabolical savagery without God's protection.
You try to prove it with the argument that the most bloodthirsty enemy confessed himself to have been overcome not by the Lord's virtue but by Job's, because he did not say that God's grace hindered him in the severer conflict, as if that man ought to be surrounded by divine protection in losses and bereavements but not need help in the torments of his flesh and soul.
If, therefore, this greatness of spirit, which overcomes the punishment of so many deaths inflicted on each and every limb, is considered the most memorable and illustrious among the palms of the saints, and you assert it to subsist from human virtue alone, what praise and merit will remain that the liberty of free will cannot attain in the pursuits of peace and quiet, which you have crowned with its own strength at the end of such a great struggle?
I therefore ask you, do you think that this man, when he was tested by the torments we read about, had the Holy Spirit in him?
If you say he had it, it is certain that God, whom he did not abandon, helped him.
But if you say the Holy Spirit departed from him, his prophetic word convicts you, saying, "For I know that my Redeemer lives, and at the last day I will rise from the earth, and I will be clothed again with my skin, and in my flesh I will see God, whom I will see for myself, and my eyes will behold, and not another: my hope is laid up in my bosom" (Job 19:25).
If this is rightly understood as a prophecy about the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, his resurrection as the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep, and the hope of redemption laid up in him for all the saints, it clearly appears that the grace of God did not depart from his temple and that the Lord already did in this his holy one what he promised to do later in his apostles and martyrs, saying, "But when they deliver you up, do not worry about how or what you should speak.
For it will be given to you in that hour what you should speak; for it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you" (Matthew 10:19).
What then when the same holy man...
Would he not have answered, did he not trust in God's help, saying, "He who is mocked by his friend as I am will call upon the Lord, and He will answer him"  (Job twelve four)? Or did he not know that he possessed what he had from Him, about whom he said, "With Him is wisdom and strength; He has counsel and understanding"  (Job thirteen three)? And about whom he says, "In His hand is the life of every living thing and the breath of all mankind"  (Job twelve ten)? And again, "I wait for my change to come; You will call, and I will answer You; You will stretch out Your hand to the work of Your hands. You indeed have counted my steps, but You spare my sins; You have sealed up my transgressions in a bag, but You have healed my iniquity."  Therefore, the Lord had not abandoned the one whom He was healing, nor had He withdrawn His help from the one to whom He was applying purifying remedies to make him shine more clearly.
To this endurance of sufferings, in which this saint shone, that man was also prepared by the Lord, who said, "Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for You are with me"  (Psalm twenty-three four): and that, "The salvation of the righteous is from the Lord, and He is their protector in time of trouble"  (Psalm thirty-seven thirty-nine). To this endurance, that man was also prepared by the Lord, who attributed both believing in Christ and suffering for Christ to Christ, saying: "Therefore, having been justified by faith, let us have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; through whom also we have access by faith into this grace in which we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of the children of God: and not only that, but we also glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces patience, and patience, character, and character, hope. Now hope does not disappoint, because the love of God has been poured out in our hearts by the Holy Spirit who was given to us"  (Romans five one). And again, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, 'For Your sake we are killed all day long; we are counted as sheep for the slaughter'  (Psalm forty-four twenty-two): but in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him who loved us"  (Romans eight thirty-three). The strength of this endurance, whence it descended, blessed Peter, and in him the whole Church, learned from the voice of Truth itself, saying, "Indeed, Satan has asked to sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for you, Peter, that your faith should not fail"  (Luke twenty-two thirty-one). Therefore, whoever does not fail in tribulations should not doubt that he is helped by Him to whom the hearts of all the faithful cry out daily, "Do not lead us into temptation, but deliver us from evil"  (Matthew six thirteen): for "The Lord protects the souls of His saints; He will deliver them from the hand of the wicked"  (Psalm ninety-seven ten).
But as you say: The grace of God did not entirely depart from Job, because God allowed his tempter so much.
Chapter Sixteen
Cassianus tries to confirm what he taught previously by using the example of the evangelical centurion. His eleventh assertion is: It is of no praise or merit if Christ highlights in a person only what He Himself has given. Saint Prosper counters, proving that praise and merit are not taken away by grace; and that praise and merit are attributed to faith and good works without prejudice to grace.
To these definitions of yours, which you believed to be supported by adequate authority, you add, as if confident of the readers' agreement, that God sometimes offers more than sufficient to test our faith, so that the strength of the believers' faith can be recognized.
You show this with the example of the centurion who, when asking for healing for his servant, and the Lord promised to come to his house, responded, "I am not worthy that you should enter under my roof, but only say the word, and my servant will be healed" (Matthew 8:8).
In this, the Lord praised him with such admiration that He proclaimed He had not found such great faith in Israel.
And with this minimal conclusion, you almost confirm the whole Pelagian doctrine by saying (Conference 13, Chapter 14), "For there would be no praise or merit if Christ highlighted in him what He Himself had given."
Therefore, it is falsely written (Wisdom 8:21), "Because no one can be self-restrained unless God grants it."
The Apostle falsely preached when he spoke of the same virtue, saying (First Corinthians 7:7), "I wish that all men were as I am; but each has his own gift from God, one in this way, another in that."
And it is falsely taught by the one who said (James 1:5), "If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, and it will be given to him."
Nor is it true (James 1:17), "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights"; and (John 3:27), "A man can receive nothing unless it has been given to him from heaven."
Should we say that all virtues should be counted among God's gifts, but in those which a person has by his own, he is praiseworthy, and there is merit where God's gifts are not present?
Therefore, according to your rule, those who are given not only to believe in Christ but also to suffer for Him, have lost both praise and merit; nor do they have true glory who glory not in themselves, but in the Lord.
But more rightly we hear the prophet saying (Jeremiah 17:5), "Cursed is the man who trusts in man and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord"; and the one who said (Psalm 18:1), "I will love you, O Lord, my strength"; and (Psalm 34:3), "My soul shall make its boast in the Lord"; and (Psalm 118:14), "The Lord is my strength and my song."
So that we may clearly know, they have neither praise nor merit in whom are not found those things which, unless the Lord gives, are not possessed.
Thus, you thought that praise for the testimony of faith could prejudice the gifts of grace; as if faith, where it is praised, is not also taught to be a gift.
The Apostle praises the faith of the Romans, and for this good he gives thanks to God, saying (Romans 1:8), "First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is proclaimed in all the world."
He writes to the Corinthians with a similar affection, saying (First Corinthians 1:4), "I give thanks to my God."
Always for you, in the grace of God, which is given to you in Christ Jesus; because in everything you have been made rich in Him, in every word and in all knowledge.
Did He remove praise by giving thanks to God, to the believers? Or by praising the believers, did He deny the author of merit? Let us also hear what he thinks about the faith of the Ephesians. Therefore, he says in Ephesians, chapter 1, verse 15,  "And I too, having heard of your faith, which is in the Lord Jesus, and love for all the saints, do not cease giving thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him, illuminating the eyes of your heart."
So, they had faith, they also had works of love, which could neither lack praise nor merit; but for these virtues, the Apostle does not cease to give thanks to God, knowing that these gifts have come from the Father of lights, from whom he also declares that he asks, that to those whom He has given faith, which works through love, He may give the Spirit of wisdom and understanding: and hence the Ephesians may know that they have received what they have, from whom they learn to hope for what they do not have.
For the Philippians too, he gives similar thanks to God, and does not suppress their merit and praise, saying in Philippians, chapter 1, verse 3,  "I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, always in every prayer of mine for you all making my request with joy, for your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now: being confident of this very thing, that He who has begun a good work in you will complete it until the day of Jesus Christ."
Whose human praise and merit is now suspended in God? What virtue or piety is there that did not flow from the fountain of grace, where from the beginning to the end, both the initiation and the perfection of a good work are attributed to the Lord? Of whom it is sung concerning His saints in Psalm, chapter 89, verses 16 to 17,  "Lord, they shall walk in the light of Your face, and in Your name they shall rejoice all day, and in Your righteousness they shall be exalted, for You are the glory of their strength."
Chapter Sixteen
How Much Cassian Supports the Pelagians in the Above Refuted Points, Saying that the Grace of God is Given According to Our Merits; Whom He Nevertheless Accuses of Profane Opinion, Thus Proving Himself Self-Contradictory. Salvation Cannot Be By Any Means, Except Through Faith.
It should certainly be considered in this opinion of yours how much you help those who say that the Grace of God is given according to our merits; whom you nevertheless, to defend the shadow of the Catholic faith, profess to be of a profane opinion, saying: Let no one think that these things were stated by us for this reason, that we might strive to establish that the ultimate salvation consists in the power of our faith, according to the profane opinion of some, who, attributing everything to free will, define that the grace of God is dispensed according to the merit of each one.
But I wonder greatly how you do not see, or think that others do not see, that you condemn yourself with your own words.
For by saying that the centurion, whose faith was praised by the Lord's voice, would have no praise or merit if he had preferred what was given to him, you have defined that the centurion had not a given faith, but his own; and thus nothing was conferred on him by grace at the beginning; but in that same faith was the cause of praise and merit, neither of which he would have if the Lord had given what is due to praise and merit.
Therefore, in vain, to escape the odium of a condemned error, you deny that the ultimate salvation consists in the power of our faith, since in every way salvation cannot be except through faith.
For the righteous shall live by faith
Romans 1:17;
Habakkuk 2:4.
Because the Truth says, Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes in him who sent me has eternal life and does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life
John 5:24.
And again, this is the will of my Father, that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him may have eternal life; and I will raise him up on the last day
John 6:40.
And again, this is eternal life, that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent
John 17:3.
Since, therefore, it is clear that eternal and blessed life is prepared for this faith, which you have honored with merits and praises because you prefer to count it among the goods of free will rather than among the gifts of God, how will you avoid this wound, which you inflict on yourself, by declaring those profane who define that grace is dispensed according to human merits, and asserting that those who are faithful by the gift of grace have neither praise nor merit?
Therefore, whichever way you turn, you are both conquered by yourself and conquer yourself.
For if merits do not precede grace, and faith cannot be without merits, faith does not precede grace, and in every way whatever that is from which merit is born is obtained by grace, which is not possessed before grace.
Chapter Eighteen
Cassian tries to mix inconsistencies and divides the faithful into two categories, applying different principles to each.
Cassian's twelfth definition: God, in the matter of salvation, is a savior to some, and merely a supporter to others.
Saint Prosper counters this, proving that Christ is the savior of all who are saved.
Cassian's views on grace and free will horrify the disciples of evangelical and apostolic doctrine.
To prevent the absurdity of your definitions from appearing contradictory, you try to mix inconsistencies and establish a new presumption by dividing the unity of the members of the body of Christ into two categories of the faithful:
One category to which pertains what you said at the beginning (Conferences Thirteen, chapter Three), that not only the beginnings of good actions but also of good thoughts come from God, who initiates, executes, and completes the good in us.
Another category to which applies the rule where you say that the centurion would have had neither praise nor merit if the Lord had preferred in him what He had given him.
And although you have extended the entire context of your argument to these two formulas, which cannot be consistent with each other, you now more distinctly and expressly declare what you want to affirm, saying:
Through these examples which we have drawn from the records of the Gospels, we can most evidently observe that God procures the salvation of humanity in various and innumerable ways, and by inscrutable methods.
He incites the zeal of some who are willing and eager, while compelling others who are unwilling and resistant; sometimes helping to fulfill what He has seen beneficially desired by us, and at other times inspiring the beginnings of holy desire; either granting the initiation of good works or perseverance.
That is why, when praying, we proclaim the Lord not only as protector and savior but also as helper and supporter.
For in that He first calls and draws us, ignorant and unwilling, to salvation, He is protector and savior; and in that He customarily aids us when we strive and take refuge, He is called supporter and refuge.
Therefore, with this distinction prescribed, as you define, there will be this diversity in the one Church:
That our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom it is said (Matthew Chapter One, verse Twenty-One), "You shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins," and of whom it is said (Luke Chapter One, verse Thirty-Two; Acts Chapter Four, verse Twelve), "There is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved," will be the savior of some Christians and merely the supporter of others.
Thus, only those will be saved whom God has compelled to receive grace, even though they were averse and resistant; while those who anticipated their calling with fervor will merely be supported.
To the former, the free gift will be granted; to the latter, the due reward will be repaid.
The former will have no praise or merit, having nothing good except what they have received; the latter, who offered what they had not received by their own devotion, will abound in glory and be enriched with rewards.
And so Jesus Christ found some who were already freed, and He freed others. It does not apply to everyone what He said in John 15:16, "You did not choose me, but I chose you," if there are some from whom, although He did not choose them, He was chosen. It does not apply to everyone, "No one can come to me unless it is granted by my Father" (John 6:66), if there are those who could come to the Son without the Father granting it. It does not apply to everyone what the Evangelist said in John 1:9, "He was the true light, which gives light to everyone coming into this world," if there are those who either came into this world in such a way that they were not in darkness, or became light in such a way that they did not need the illumination of the true light. Nor should it be taken of all those adopted what the Apostle said in Colossians 1:13, "He has rescued us from the power of darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of His beloved Son," if indeed they themselves break their own chains, and, shaking off the yoke of old captivity, pass with great eagerness from the domination of the devil into the kingdom of God. If these things can be preached within one Church, so that neither opinion yields to the other, but each one submits to the other, it might be possible for us to accept what the Pelagians hold, and for the Pelagians to accept what we hold. But in this way, not so much will they be Catholics as we will become (God forbid) Pelagians. For the mixing of opposites is the weakening of the better; because when virtue accepts vice, it is not vice that is abandoned, but virtue.
Therefore, in no way do Christian hearts accept your attempt to persuade them that those who are what they are by the grace of God neither have any praise nor merit; and that among those who came to save what was lost, part of the Christians are saved, but part are only received. Since the disciples of the evangelical and apostolic doctrine, not being wise in their own eyes but associating with the humble, shun this madness of proud arrogance. Indeed, in the whole body of the Church, and in each of its members, what was dead has been brought to life, what was captive has been redeemed, what was blind has been illuminated, what was lost has been sought, what was erring has been found. And not according to this new partition, is He the savior of some and the receiver of others, but Christ is both the savior and receiver of all the faithful everywhere. Nor are they deprived of merit and praise who receive from Him the means to attain eternal good; and they become more blessed the fewer things they have that are their own, and the more things they have that are God's. For we are not disturbed by the foolish complaint of the proud, arguing that free will is taken away if both the beginnings, progress, and perseverance in good to the end are said to be gifts of God.
The assistance of divine grace is the strength of human will. We pray willingly; and yet God sent His Spirit into our hearts crying, "Abba, Father" (Galatians 4:6). We speak willingly; and yet, if what we speak is pious, it is not we who speak, but the Spirit of our Father speaking in us (Matthew 10:20; Mark 13:11). We willingly work for our salvation; and yet it is God who works in us to will and to act according to His good purpose (Philippians 2:13). We willingly love God and our neighbor.
And yet, love is from God First John 4:7,
poured into our hearts by the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us Romans 5:5.
This we profess about faith, this about enduring sufferings, this about marital chastity, this about virginal continence, and all virtues without exception;
because if they had not been given to us, they would not be found in us:
and that free will, naturally given to man, remains in nature;
but its quality and condition have been changed through the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus:
who diverted the will itself from perversely wanting, to wanting what was good for it;
so that, with affection delighted, faith cleansed,
he would embrace willing servitude, and
Chapter Nineteen
Prosper Recapitulates the Twelve Definitions of Cassian:
To Make Clearer What Those Who Spoke Against the Defenders of Grace Thought About Grace and Disturbed the Peace of the Church by Reviving Questions from the School of the Condemned Pelagians.
From these definitions that we have discussed so far, by omitting some, it is not unclear or ambiguous what those who speak against the most sincere defenders of God's grace think about grace, and disturb the peace of the victorious Church by reviving questions from the school of the condemned.
If we were to recount them as we have heard, our discourse would become excessively lengthy.
From what is known from their own writings, any devout reader can easily understand the precipices reached by these paths, and the muddy bog of these turbid streams, whose mire exudes.
I think it is necessary, before concluding this volume, to briefly and collectively summarize what we have shown to be inconsistent with Catholic truth, so that what might escape the reader's memory when interspersed with our responses, can be more easily recalled when reviewed together.
In the first definition it is said:
Not only the beginnings of actions but also of good thoughts come from God, who inspires us with the beginnings of holy will and grants us the strength and opportunity to carry out what we rightly desire.
For every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, who begins and continues and completes all good things in us.
This we fully accept and profess to be Catholic.
In the second definition it is said:
Divine protection is inseparably present with us, and such is the Creator's compassion for His creation that He not only accompanies it but also continually precedes it with His providence.
The Prophet, experiencing this, confesses, saying: "My God, His mercy will go before me" (Psalm Fifty-Nine, Verse Ten).
When He sees in us a budding good will, He enlightens and strengthens it, and urges it towards salvation, granting growth to what He has either planted Himself or seen emerge through our effort.
Here, however, we depart from the previous definition, and what was wholly attributed to grace is now in part assigned to free will.
Nevertheless, in all these things, both the grace of God and the freedom of will are shown, by which a person can, by their own movements, sometimes extend towards virtuous desires, but always needs to be helped by the Lord.
For when someone wishes, they enjoy good health, or they are freed from disease as they desire.
As if our doctor does not also grant the sick the desire for true health.
To make it clearer, even the beginnings of good intentions, which sometimes come from the goodness of nature granted by the Creator, cannot reach the perfection of virtues unless they are directed by the Lord. The Apostle is a witness, saying:
"For I have the desire to do what is good, but I cannot carry it out"
Romans 7:18.
As if the Apostle has a good will from natural affection rather than from the gift of grace, when he declares that his ability to think even comes from God
2 Corinthians 3:5.
And these things are so indiscriminately mixed and confused that it is a great question among many as to what depends on what: whether it is because we have begun with good will that God has mercy on us, or because God has mercy, we attain the beginning of good will. Many people believe each of these points, and by asserting more than is just, they are entangled in various and contradictory errors. If we say that the beginning of good will is ours, what was it in the persecutor Paul? What in the tax collector Matthew? One was attracted to salvation while involved in the bloodshed and sufferings of the innocent, the other in public violence and plundering. But if we always say that the beginnings of good will are inspired by the grace of God, what shall we say about Zacchaeus' faith? What about the piety of the thief on the cross? They, by their own desire, forced their way into the heavenly kingdom, anticipating the special calls of vocation.
It is said to be an error both to assert that good will is born of grace and to say that grace depends on good will: yet it is determined that both opinions should be accepted, as one is exemplified in Paul and Matthew, and the other in Zacchaeus and the thief.
Therefore, these two things, grace and free will, seem to be opposed to each other, but both are in agreement, and we gather that we must accept both equally in the reasoning of piety: lest by removing one of these from humans, we seem to have exceeded the rule of ecclesiastical faith.
As if it should be accepted that in some people will precedes grace, and in others grace precedes will: and not that in all cases will follows grace. Because according to them, if free will is taken away when it is preceded by grace, grace is removed when it is preceded by free will.
Therefore, Adam conceived the knowledge of evil after his transgression, which he did not have before; he did not lose the knowledge of good which he had received.
Both statements are false: for Adam, being forewarned by God, knew from how much evil he should guard himself; and he forgot the great good in which he was established when he believed the devil. Just as the knowledge of evil is very harmful, so is the ignorance of good, which is very harmful.
Therefore, we must be careful not to attribute all the merits of the saints to God in such a way that we ascribe nothing but what is evil to human nature.
As if nature before grace is not in damnation.
And, there should be no blindness or injury: or they are not justified freely, since their merits come from there, where justice is.
Therefore, it cannot be doubted that every soul naturally has the seeds of three hundred and sixty virtues, inserted by the Creator's benefit: but unless these are awakened by God's help, they cannot reach the growth of perfection.
It is as if Adam lost nothing of spiritual goods by transgressing; and virtue is not given to be possessed, but to more easily attain perfection, it must be encouraged.
This is also shown in Job, God's most tested athlete. When the devil sought him for a one-on-one fight, we read that divine justice provided for him. For if he had fought against the enemy not by his own virtue but solely by God's protecting grace, and had endured those many trials and destructions sought by the enemy's entire cruelty without any virtue of his patience, supported only by divine help, how could the devil not have repeated the slanderous voice he had previously uttered against him: "Does Job worship God for nothing? Haven't you protected him and his household and everything he has on every side? But take away your hand, that is, let him fight against me with his own strength, unless he will curse you to your face." But since the slanderous enemy dared not repeat any such complaint after the conflict, he confessed himself defeated not by God's strength but by Job's. Although it should be believed that God's grace was not entirely absent from him, which granted the tempter such power to tempt, as it knew Job had the strength to resist.
If God only knew what Job could do but did not also grant that he could do it, He would be a witness to Job's patience, not a helper. And where would the necessity of the grace's aid be if such a great victory were achieved by human strength alone?
In the eleventh definition, it was said about the faith of the centurion: The Lord marvels at him and praises him, preferring him to all those who had believed from the people of Israel, saying, "Truly I tell you, I have not found such great faith in Israel." For there would be no praise or merit if the Lord had preferred in him what He Himself had given.
It is a wicked sentiment that thinks a man to whom God has given nothing is happier than one to whom He has given everything.
Therefore, when praying, we call the Lord not only our protector but also our supporter. For in that He first calls us and brings us to salvation, even when we are ignorant and unwilling, He is called protector and savior. But in that He is accustomed to help us when we strive, and to support and defend us when we flee for refuge, He is called supporter and refuge.
Anyone who can agree with this sentiment does not want to be saved by Christ.
Chapter Twenty: Errors contained in Cassian's definitions are summarized.
These definitions teach and write this, and it is proclaimed in published discussions:
That when Adam sinned, his soul was not harmed and remained healthy in him, from which he sinned:
indeed, the knowledge of good that he received, he did not lose; nor could his descendants lose it, of which he did not suffer the loss.
Moreover, every soul naturally has seeds of virtue implanted by the Creator’s benefit, so that whoever wants to, by natural judgment, can anticipate God's grace, and merit His help, to more easily reach perfection:
because there is no praise or merit for someone who is adorned with given goods, not their own.
It should also be avoided that all the merits of the saints are referred to God in such a way, as if human nature itself can do nothing good by itself:
since its integrity of power is so great, that it can fight against the devil himself and his cruelty up to the extreme punishments, without God’s help.
This possibility is natural in all men, but not all want to use the virtues generated within themselves.
Moreover, the Creator's goodness is so great towards all men, that some are received with praise because they come voluntarily, while others are drawn unwillingly because they resist: and therefore He is the receiver of those who want and the savior of those who do not want.
And since part of the Church is justified by grace, and part by free will, those whom nature has advanced are more glorious than those whom grace has freed: because the free will in Adam’s descendants is as free for every good work as it was in Adam before the sin.
Chapter Twenty-One
Returning to the defense of Augustine, who was especially attacked by the Semipelagians, accusing him of the same things as the Pelagians had done before, and Julian in particular.
Therefore, these should be fought with the same weapons by which the Pelagians were defeated, namely, the authority of the Church:
since Innocent struck down Augustine's opponents with the condemnation of the Pelagians, and the same were condemned by the Palestinian Synod, the African Councils, Zosimus, Boniface, and Celestine.
The mockery against the testimony of Celestine is refuted.
Augustine's doctrine is shown to be consistent everywhere.
The prayer of Saint Prosper, that Pope Sixtus may repel the hidden enemies of grace.
Behold what kind of teachers these are, who, in order to corrupt the purity of Catholic minds by slandering the defenders of grace, tear apart with rabid mouths that preeminent man of our time in ecclesiastical doctrine, and believe that they can overthrow all the defenses of authority if they repeatedly strike this very strong tower of pastoral watchfulness with the Pelagian battering ram.
Indeed, the firm foundation of God stands.
Second Timothy 2:19:
yet these men do not fail in their efforts.
It is fitting that those who follow their opinion should also imitate their madness.
For they cannot say anything other than what has been spread by the complaints of the condemned and the insults of the most insolent Julian.
The products of one seed are alike, and what was hidden in the roots is revealed in the fruits.
Therefore, it is not necessary to fight with a new strategy against these men, nor to undertake special battles as if against unknown enemies.
Their machines were broken then, and they fell with the allies and leaders of their pride, when Innocent of blessed memory struck the heads of their wicked error with the apostolic sword:
when the synod of Palestinian bishops forced Pelagius to pronounce judgment on himself and his followers:
when Pope Zosimus of blessed memory annexed the strength of his judgment to the decrees of the African councils, and armed the hands of all the bishops with the sword of Peter for the destruction of the impious:
when Pope Boniface of holy memory rejoiced in the Catholic devotion of the most pious emperors, and used not only apostolic but also royal edicts against the enemies of God's grace;
and when the same man, though he was very learned, still sought the answers of the blessed Bishop Augustine against the books of the Pelagians.
Hence, the venerable Pope Celestine, to whom the Lord granted many gifts of His grace for the protection of the Catholic Church, knowing that the condemned were to be granted not a trial of judgment, but only the remedy of penance:
ordered the expulsion of Celestius, who was seeking a hearing as if the matter had not been discussed, from all the borders of Italy:
so much did he consider the statutes and synodal decrees of his predecessors inviolable, that he would not allow what had once deserved to be cut off to be reconsidered.
Nor with less diligence did he free Britain from the same disease, when he excluded some enemies of grace who were occupying only the land of their origin, even from that remote part of the Ocean, and by appointing a bishop to the Scots, namely Palladius, while striving to keep the Roman island Catholic, he also made the barbarian land Christian.
Through this man, the Eastern Churches were also purged of a twin plague, when he sent Cyril, bishop of the city of Alexandria, the most glorious defender of the Catholic faith...
Exsecrable, or finally the Venetian edition, to eradicate. To cut out Nestorian impiety, he was assisted by the apostolic sword; by which even the Pelagians, while they joined with related errors, were again overthrown.
Through this man within Gaul, those who criticize the writings of the blessed Augustine had their liberty of bad eloquence taken away. When action was taken by those consulting, and the piety of the books displeasing to the erring was praised, he clearly revealed with holy eloquence what should be thought of their authority. He openly declared how much he disliked the presumption of this novelty, by which some dared to insolently rise against ancient teachers, and with undisciplined slander oppose the preaching of truth:
Augustine, he says (Letter of Coelestine to the Gauls), a man of holy remembrance, for his life and merits, we have always had in our communion; nor was he ever even rumored to have been tainted by any sinister suspicion, whom we remember to have been of such great knowledge, that he was always held among the best teachers even by my predecessors. Therefore, everyone has thought well of him in common; as one who has been loved and honored by all everywhere.
Against this trumpet of the most illustrious praise, against this dignity of the most sacred testimony, does anyone dare to emit the murmur of malicious interpretation, and to cast the cloud of ambiguous obscurity upon the clear and pure judgment? So that because in the pope's letter, the titles of the books in question are not explicitly stated, it might appear from this that they were not approved, and that this praise was given to holy Augustine for the merits of previous authors. Let it plainly remain, let this condition remain, that the novelty of these books (Lib. on the Predestination of the Saints and on the Gift of Perseverance) seems to be rejected, if in the same cause the antiquity of the same man disagrees; and it is judged either useless or inappropriate, which is found to be inconsistent with those things written against the Pelagians.
So let us omit those volumes in which from the beginning of his bishopric, long before the attackers of grace arose, he argued for grace, and let the three books to Marcellinus (On the Merits of Sins) be read. To Saint Paulinus of Nola, bishop, let the letter (Letter 186) be reviewed. Also to the blessed Sixtus, then a presbyter of the apostolic see, now a pope, let the pages (Letter 194) be revisited. Let the volumes distinctly edited be reviewed, to Saint Pinianus (On the Grace of Christ and Original Sin), to Count Valerius (On Marriage and Concupiscence), to the servants of Christ Timasius and Jacobus (On Nature and Grace).
The first six books against Julian, one to Saint Aurelius, the bishop of Carthage on the deeds of Palestine: another to Paul and Eutropius priests, against the questions of Pelagius and Coelestius (On Perfect Justice): and to the blessed memory of Pope Boniface four volumes (Against the Two Letters of the Pelagians) are reviewed.
With their works, Cologne.
Then he omits, with others; and they end the phrase with a comma before recognizing.
If in all these works, and in many others, which would take too long to list, the same spirit of teaching and the same form of preaching preceded, let the accusers acknowledge that they are objecting in vain.
These books are not given a special or separate testimony, whose norms are praised in all volumes.
For the Apostolic see does not differ from what is already known to it.
It proves with what is already known, and what it joins in judgment, it does not divide in praise.
Therefore, those who refute these newly published books should agree with the previous ones and consent to those writings which were first composed for the Christian grace.
But they do not.
For they know that all Pelagian things are contrary to them, and that nothing can be applicable to them for resolving subsequent matters, if they confess that the truth lies in the preceding ones.
Therefore, to resist the depravity of such men, it is necessary not so much by the zeal of disputations as by the privilege of authorities.
So that from the body of doctrines long overthrown, no member is allowed to rise.
Because it is known that the cunning of this falsehood is held, that if it senses under the pretense of correction any shoot of its favorers taking root, it may want to renew itself from even a small part of itself.
For where the whole has no other part than a portion, it is not devotion to have given almost the whole, but fraud to have retained even the least.
So that the snares of hypocrites are not obtained, we trust that with the Lord's protection it will be granted, that what was worked in Innocent, Zosimus, Boniface, and Celestine, will be worked in Sixtus.
In the custody of the Lord's flock, this part of glory is reserved for this shepherd, that as they drove away manifest wolves, so he may drive away hidden ones.
With the most learned old man ringing this sermon in his ears, with which he encouraged his collaborator, saying:
"There are indeed some who think that impieties, justly condemned, should still be defended more freely.
And there are those who more secretly penetrate houses; and what they now fear to shout openly, they do not cease to sow in secret."
There are also those who have completely fallen silent, greatly suppressed by fear, but still retaining in their hearts what they no longer dare to utter with their mouths: who, nevertheless, can be very well known to the brothers from their former defense of that doctrine.
Therefore, some are to be more severely restrained, others more vigilantly searched out; others, indeed, to be treated more gently, but no less diligently taught.
They are feared so they do not stray, but not neglected so they do not perish.
Augustine, letter 19 to Sixtus.
Chapter Twenty-Two
Although Augustine's critics are sufficiently proven wrong, they must still be tolerated, and we should not lose hope for their correction.
In the meantime, they should always be loved but avoided, and we should pray to God to take the lead in all our efforts.
I believe it has been sufficiently demonstrated that the critics of Saint Augustine both bring up empty objections and attack what is right, while defending what is wrong.
They stir up internal strife with the tools of the defeated, rebelling against both divine and human laws.
However, as long as they are not yet separated from the brotherly community, their intention should be tolerated more than their correction should be despaired of.
So that until the Lord, through the leaders of the Church and the legitimate ministers of His judgments, rectifies what has been disturbed by the pride of a few and the ignorance of some, we, with God's help, should strive with quiet and modest patience, to return love for hatred, avoid the conflicts of the foolish, uphold the truth, and not contend with falsehood.
Always ask God that in all our thoughts, wills, words, and actions, He may take the lead, who said He is the beginning.
For from Him, and through Him, and in Him are all things: to Him be glory forever. Amen.
Here ends the book of Saint Prosper against the book of the former abbot Cassian, which is titled, On the Protection of God; or against the doctrine of Pelagius and Celestius, the inventors and defenders of that wicked doctrine, and the enemies of the grace of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, and in defense of the holy Roman bishops and Saint Bishop Augustine, asserting the truth from his books against the aforementioned heretics. Thanks be to God.