Chapter Eighteen

Cassian tries to mix inconsistencies and divides the faithful into two categories, applying different principles to each.

Cassian's twelfth definition: God, in the matter of salvation, is a savior to some, and merely a supporter to others.

Saint Prosper counters this, proving that Christ is the savior of all who are saved.

Cassian's views on grace and free will horrify the disciples of evangelical and apostolic doctrine.

To prevent the absurdity of your definitions from appearing contradictory, you try to mix inconsistencies and establish a new presumption by dividing the unity of the members of the body of Christ into two categories of the faithful:

One category to which pertains what you said at the beginning (Conferences Thirteen, chapter Three), that not only the beginnings of good actions but also of good thoughts come from God, who initiates, executes, and completes the good in us.

Another category to which applies the rule where you say that the centurion would have had neither praise nor merit if the Lord had preferred in him what He had given him.

And although you have extended the entire context of your argument to these two formulas, which cannot be consistent with each other, you now more distinctly and expressly declare what you want to affirm, saying:

Through these examples which we have drawn from the records of the Gospels, we can most evidently observe that God procures the salvation of humanity in various and innumerable ways, and by inscrutable methods.

He incites the zeal of some who are willing and eager, while compelling others who are unwilling and resistant; sometimes helping to fulfill what He has seen beneficially desired by us, and at other times inspiring the beginnings of holy desire; either granting the initiation of good works or perseverance.

That is why, when praying, we proclaim the Lord not only as protector and savior but also as helper and supporter.

For in that He first calls and draws us, ignorant and unwilling, to salvation, He is protector and savior; and in that He customarily aids us when we strive and take refuge, He is called supporter and refuge.

Therefore, with this distinction prescribed, as you define, there will be this diversity in the one Church:

That our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom it is said (Matthew Chapter One, verse Twenty-One), "You shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins," and of whom it is said (Luke Chapter One, verse Thirty-Two; Acts Chapter Four, verse Twelve), "There is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved," will be the savior of some Christians and merely the supporter of others.

Thus, only those will be saved whom God has compelled to receive grace, even though they were averse and resistant; while those who anticipated their calling with fervor will merely be supported.

To the former, the free gift will be granted; to the latter, the due reward will be repaid.

The former will have no praise or merit, having nothing good except what they have received; the latter, who offered what they had not received by their own devotion, will abound in glory and be enriched with rewards.

And so Jesus Christ found some who were already freed, and He freed others. It does not apply to everyone what He said in John 15:16, "You did not choose me, but I chose you," if there are some from whom, although He did not choose them, He was chosen. It does not apply to everyone, "No one can come to me unless it is granted by my Father" (John 6:66), if there are those who could come to the Son without the Father granting it. It does not apply to everyone what the Evangelist said in John 1:9, "He was the true light, which gives light to everyone coming into this world," if there are those who either came into this world in such a way that they were not in darkness, or became light in such a way that they did not need the illumination of the true light. Nor should it be taken of all those adopted what the Apostle said in Colossians 1:13, "He has rescued us from the power of darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of His beloved Son," if indeed they themselves break their own chains, and, shaking off the yoke of old captivity, pass with great eagerness from the domination of the devil into the kingdom of God. If these things can be preached within one Church, so that neither opinion yields to the other, but each one submits to the other, it might be possible for us to accept what the Pelagians hold, and for the Pelagians to accept what we hold. But in this way, not so much will they be Catholics as we will become (God forbid) Pelagians. For the mixing of opposites is the weakening of the better; because when virtue accepts vice, it is not vice that is abandoned, but virtue.

Therefore, in no way do Christian hearts accept your attempt to persuade them that those who are what they are by the grace of God neither have any praise nor merit; and that among those who came to save what was lost, part of the Christians are saved, but part are only received. Since the disciples of the evangelical and apostolic doctrine, not being wise in their own eyes but associating with the humble, shun this madness of proud arrogance. Indeed, in the whole body of the Church, and in each of its members, what was dead has been brought to life, what was captive has been redeemed, what was blind has been illuminated, what was lost has been sought, what was erring has been found. And not according to this new partition, is He the savior of some and the receiver of others, but Christ is both the savior and receiver of all the faithful everywhere. Nor are they deprived of merit and praise who receive from Him the means to attain eternal good; and they become more blessed the fewer things they have that are their own, and the more things they have that are God's. For we are not disturbed by the foolish complaint of the proud, arguing that free will is taken away if both the beginnings, progress, and perseverance in good to the end are said to be gifts of God.

The assistance of divine grace is the strength of human will. We pray willingly; and yet God sent His Spirit into our hearts crying, "Abba, Father" (Galatians 4:6). We speak willingly; and yet, if what we speak is pious, it is not we who speak, but the Spirit of our Father speaking in us (Matthew 10:20; Mark 13:11). We willingly work for our salvation; and yet it is God who works in us to will and to act according to His good purpose (Philippians 2:13). We willingly love God and our neighbor.

And yet, love is from God 
First
 John 4:7,
      poured into our hearts by the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us 
Romans
 5:5.

This we profess about faith, this about enduring sufferings, this about marital chastity, this about virginal continence, and all virtues without exception;

because if they had not been given to us, they would not be found in us:

and that free will, naturally given to man, remains in nature;

but its quality and condition have been changed through the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus:
      who diverted the will itself from perversely wanting, to wanting what was good for it;

so that, with affection delighted, faith cleansed,
      he would embrace willing servitude, and