Chapter Eleven

Free will neither has the desire for good nor the ability to do it, except through grace.

Why humans are commanded to do things which they cannot find the ability to do in their own nature. The eighth definition from Cassian: To human nature, not only what is evil should be ascribed. Human merits are nothing without grace.

1. After this, in the conclusion of the testimonies which he wanted to prove, that those who are called deaf and blind through prophetic rebuke can, from the faculty of nature, open their ears to hear and their eyes to see (as if the Lord does not say about them, "And I will give them another heart, and a new spirit I will give them; and I will remove the heart of stone from their flesh, and give them a heart of flesh; that they may walk in my statutes, and keep my ordinances, and do them" (Ezekiel 11:19 and 36:26)); he adds and says (Conference 13, chapter 12):

Finally, to signify that the ability for good is in them, rebuking them, he said, "And why do you not judge for yourselves what is right?" (Luke 12:57). He would not have said this unless he knew they could discern what is right by natural judgment. Now, he ascribes not only the desire for good but also the ability to free will: as if the understanding is demanded from them, justice is required, because they can bring these forth from the good of nature without God's gifts. These things, however, are commanded to man so that from the command itself, which indicates what he has received, he may recognize that he lost it by his own fault; and that the demand is not unjust, because he is not capable of repaying what he owes; but let him flee from the letter that kills to the spirit that gives life, and seek from grace the ability he does not find in nature. If he does this, great is the mercy of God: if he does not, just is the punishment for sin.

2. Then to the fullness of the preceding discourse, he pronounces a regular sentence, saying:

Hence, we must beware lest we refer all the merits of the saints to God in such a way that we ascribe nothing but what is evil and perverse to human nature. What is clearer, what is more expressly defined according to the teaching of Pelagius and Celestius by any of their disciples? They say, the grace of God is given according to our merits: and the same say, the grace of God is not given for individual actions: here he concluded both blasphemies within one sentence, saying, We must beware lest we refer all the merits of the saints to God in such a way that we ascribe nothing but what is evil and perverse to human nature. Therefore, he wants there to be many merits of humans, which are not bestowed by the largess of grace, which

Some natural wealth must be attributed to gifts from above. He wants us to not receive God's grace for every single action and, consequently, not to always pray for every good deed. And so, it will follow that there is no merit in God's gifts, since God always helps without merit in all things. Or if even in the things that God gives, some merits are considered, it must also be acknowledged that they could have been acquired by one's own ability. Therefore, in some cases, we must be helped so that it is made more possible by grace what was not impossible by nature. 

Behold, in this brief statement, there is not just a double but a multiple connection of many impieties, which, if examined with more scrupulous diligence, will not be shown to be free from the chain of condemned error.