CHAPTER VII.
      Cassianus, confusing contradictory definitions, tries to illustrate his point with examples, suggesting that some can achieve certain things through free will without God's help, while others cannot without God's cooperation.
      This is refuted by Scriptures, and it is shown that, like Matthew and Paul, the conversion of Zacchaeus and the thief on the cross is equally due to grace.

Also
 CHAP. XIII.

But now let us see what the sober disputant infers; who, in order to counter one fault with another, and to correct one error with another, confuses contradictory definitions with new art.
      And in order to present this concoction to unsuspecting listeners, he tries to illustrate his mix with examples.
      For he says 
Collation
 13, Chapter 11:

"If we say that the beginning of a good will is ours, what about Paul the persecutor? What about Matthew the tax collector?
      One was involved in the bloodshed and punishment of the innocent, the other in public violence and extortion, and both are drawn to salvation.
      But if we say that the beginnings of good will are always inspired by God's grace, what do we say about Zacchaeus' faith?
      What about the piety of the thief on the cross, who, by their own desire, forcefully entered the heavenly kingdom, anticipating the special call?"

Through this difference in the beginnings of good, he tries to prove that some can achieve certain things through free will without God's help, while others cannot without God's cooperation.
      And he wants this to be understood from the slower obedience of some and the more eager consent of others.

As if where hardened unbelief submits to God and suddenly succumbs to the Gospel it long resisted, there the change in man is wrought by the hand of the Most High 
Psalm
 76:11.
      But where a willing listener embraces a calm exhortation or mere rumor without hesitation, the goodness of such a conversion is solely due to human will.

As if the power of God only draws those to the Son whom He has either rebuked with His voice, crushed with punishment, or terrified; but applies none of His power to the minds of those who run eagerly and with lively desire to the promises of their Redeemer.

But the Truth says: "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him" 
John
 6:44.
      Therefore, if no one comes unless drawn, all who come in any manner are drawn.

Also
 CHAP. XIV.

Thus, the contemplation of the elements and the beautiful order of all things in them draws one to God.
      For the invisible things of Him, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made 
Romans
 1:20.

The narrators of the deeds of history draw the mind of the listener; the reporters of divine works inflame the mind.

They recount the praises of the Lord and His power, and the wonderful things He has done 

Psalm
 77:4.

Fear draws us: For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom 

Proverbs
 1:7; 

Psalm
 111:10.

Joy draws us, because, I was glad when they said to me, "Let us go to the house of the Lord" 

Psalm
 121:1.

Desire draws us: because, My soul longs, yes, even faints for the courts of the Lord 

Psalm
 84:3.

Delight draws us: How sweet are Your words to my taste, sweeter than honey to my mouth 

Psalm
 119:103.

And who can understand or explain the feelings through which God’s visitation leads the human soul, so that what it once fled, it now follows; what it once hated, it now loves; what it once disdained, it now hungers for; and by a sudden miraculous change, what was once closed becomes open; what was once burdensome becomes light; what was once bitter becomes sweet; what was once obscure becomes clear?

All this is the work of one and the same Spirit, distributing to each one as He wills 

First Corinthians
 12:14.

For God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ 

Second Corinthians
 4:6, 
    that is, in the revelation of His Son, who is in the glory of the Father.

Therefore, the same one who shone in the heart of Matthew the tax collector and Paul when he was persecuting the Church, also shone in the heart of Zacchaeus and in the heart of the thief crucified with the Lord: unless perhaps the voice of the Lord was idle when He deigned to call Zacchaeus, who sought to see who Jesus was, saying: Zacchaeus, hurry and come down; for today I must stay at your house 

Luke
 19:5; 
    and He did not prepare Zacchaeus's heart, whose house He chose to stay in.

Finally, when everyone murmured, asking why He had gone to be the guest of a sinner, and Zacchaeus, already repenting, promised to give half of his goods to the poor and repay four times the amount of any fraud, the Lord said: Today salvation has come to this house, because he too is a son of Abraham.

And to make the cause of this salvation clear, He added: For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost 

Luke
 19:10; 
    so that we might know that the one who was saved was sought first.

In the justification of the thief, even if no signs of the working of grace were understood, would we not, along with all believers, also accept that he was drawn in? For the Lord said: All things have been delivered to Me by My Father 

Luke
 10:22; 
    and, when I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all people to Myself 

John
 12:32.

In the end, let him teach. Among all things, however, this one is either handed down or drawn out, as his own confession teaches; who, after blaspheming against Jesus Christ for some time, suddenly changed and said: 
 "Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom." 

Luke twenty-three forty-two

But where such a great difference in conflicting voices in one man has originated, let the blessed Apostle instruct us and say: 
 "No one speaking in the Spirit of God says, 'Anathema Jesus'; and no one can say 'Lord Jesus,' except in the Holy Spirit." 

First Corinthians twelve three

So that we do not doubt that in the will of the same man, it was from his own will that he blasphemed, and from the Holy Spirit that he believed. 
 Therefore, this disputant, in vain, wanted to adapt the inscrutable variety of one grace to his argument's definition; so that a portion of the justified is believed to come to Christ by the movements of their own will, but the resisting portion is dragged and compelled unwillingly: 
 since it is God who works all things in all, whether He wants to attract some in one way, and others in another way, to whom no one comes unless they are somehow attracted. 

First Corinthians twelve six