Contra Collatorem: 
 A Defense of Augustine by Prosper of Aquitaine

Introduction

Among the critics of the doctrine defended by Saint Augustine in his books against the Pelagians, and particularly in the most recent ones, the most famous and learned was John Cassianus, a priest and abbot of Marseilles in the notable city of Gaul. He, as it appears more likely, was originally from Lesser Scythia, which was one of the provinces of Thrace, around the year 350 or 360, and was educated in one of the monasteries near the Bethlehem manger. He was moderately well-versed in classical literature, which Prosper acknowledges made him excel in the debates he had with those he lived with in Marseilles.

After traveling through Egypt and listening to the distinguished inhabitants of Egypt's deserts, he himself led an anchoritic life for some time. He then went to Constantinople, where he was ordained as a deacon by Saint John Chrysostom, and later elevated to the honor of the priesthood by the same. He went to Rome in the year 405 AD, and then around at least the year 415 AD, he returned to Marseilles. In that city, he built two monasteries, one for men and another for women, and he presided over the former, which has been notable by the name of Saint Victor from then to the current times.

While living in this place, at the request of Castor, bishop of the Church of Apt in the second Narbonensian, he wrote instructions suited to the governance of the monasteries established by Castor. It is clear that these were written at a time when disputes about grace were still heated, since it was already observed that he was less favorable to Augustine's doctrine than would be fitting, misled by the erroneous principle that the work of our salvation begins with us through the merit of good will, which is then brought to completion by God: this means we are distinguished by ourselves, having something that we did not receive, and therefore being able to glory not in the Lord, but in ourselves. But you would rightly surmise that these were expressed by him before the sentences against the Pelagians were pronounced by Innocent or Zosimus, after whose condemnation he would not have dared to affirm with such heretics that nothing but the law could be called the aid of divine grace.

By the same author and speaker, he also undertook to write down the series of spiritual conferences he had with the Eastern monks. He dedicated the first ten of these, after the early death of his friend Castor, to Leontius, bishop of Fréjus, and Helladius, who was not yet a bishop. He composed the following seven at the request of the saints Honoratus of Arles and Eucherius of Lyon, who later became bishops, in the year 426 AD. In these Conferences, among many things most useful for the edification of the monks of Lérins, for whose use they were intended, and worthy of the praises with which Cassianus was adorned by many learned and holy men, there are also many scattered passages, and especially almost the entire thirteenth conference, opposed to the doctrine of Saint Augustine concerning grace.

In this matter, Cassianus was more dangerously mistaken than in others, both because of the importance of the subject and the circumstances of the times. For the errors of the Pelagians had first been condemned in Rome in 418 AD, then immediately by many councils in the Eastern parts, when he published this thirteenth conference in the year 426 AD: in which indeed the same error is more explicitly contained, of which a sufficiently evident trace was already found in the third conference. Therefore, with a man of such authority as Cassianus was held, introducing a new doctrine in the heat of disputes, which, as Prosper observed, was neither entirely consistent with the heresy condemned by the Church nor in full agreement with the doctrine of Saint Augustine, who had been a major part in the condemnation of the Pelagians, it could not at all happen without considerable disturbance arising from it.

For there was no reason to reject the errors inserted in the conference into the abbot Chaeremon, whom he had introduced as speaking, since he testified that he himself fully embraced and approved of these. It was indeed his intention when he published the Conferences to express his own views while extolling with great praises the teachings of those to whom he pretended to have committed the office of teaching. It was also sufficiently evident from other places that everything approved by Chaeremon was approved by him.

Pronounced by the abbey; he demonstrated that he had sufficiently performed this duty by neither disapproving of this doctrine nor showing that it could be doubted by even the smallest objection.

Hence, it happened that many in our Gaul, especially among the servants of God, who are usually called monks, who lived in Marseilles, rose against Augustine's doctrine.

There is no doubt that they were led into errors by Cassian's authority, along with his other followers.

These monks of Marseilles were renowned men, outstanding in the pursuit of all virtues, and so respected for their integrity that many considered it safest to follow whatever they heard these monks assert without question.

Among them, Cassian was considered the most learned, and he did not hesitate to publish his thoughts in writing.

In the beginning, these monks acted cautiously, preferring to blame their own slowness rather than criticize what they did not understand in Augustine's writings.

Some of them even wanted to demand a clearer and more open explanation from him.

However, it later became clear that their darkness was born not so much from ignorance or weakness as from pride, which most affects those whose virtues are highly regarded by people.

When a book titled "On Correction and Grace," which Augustine had written in 427 to instruct the monks of Hadrumetum, was fortuitously brought to Gaul, and that book seemed to answer all the objections of the monks of Marseilles almost deliberately, they should have used the light from this book to make progress and dispel all their doubts.

However, they instead burned with greater hatred against the truth, complaining among other things that none of the church writers before Augustine had applied Paul's passages to the sense of predestination.

This objection was most fitting for Cassian, who was well-versed in Greek books, from which this objection could more naturally arise.

Because of this, Prosper and Hilary wrote letters to Saint Augustine around 428 or 429, and he responded with the books "On the Predestination of the Saints" and "On the Gift of Perseverance."

How these books were received by the Gauls is not clear; however, it is clear that they did not immediately end the turmoil of such disputes.

While Augustine was still alive, Saint Prosper wrote a letter to Rufinus, in which he testified that he hoped for this from the riches of God's mercy: that those who were then allowed to be deceived by their free will and to stray from the path of humility would not be deprived of understanding forever or to the end, but that this very delay in recalling them would serve to celebrate the work of God's grace with greater glory, when He would also subdue the hearts of even those who opposed Him, whose pursuit of virtue had become a danger, and whose uprightness of conduct had become a risk.

It is rightly doubted whether this last point should be understood of Cassian, who was known to stray further from the truth than the rest, if not in his doctrines, then at least in the way he defended his doctrines.

After Augustine was taken among the blessed, Prosper and Hilary went to Pope Celestine to lay their complaints against certain priests who had stirred up dissensions in Gaul against the doctrine of Saint Augustine, and who did not even spare his reputation.

Hence, in that famous response of his, which can be read above, Celestine accused those who, distinguished only by their rank of priesthood, did not hesitate to judge the doctrine of the Church according to their whim, and arrogated to themselves an authority that belonged only to bishops.

These words likely referred particularly to Cassian: this is more easily conjectured because the first among the bishops to whom this letter was addressed was Venerius, bishop of Marseilles, according to Gennadius.

However, Celestine's letters did not calm the disturbances, nor did they restore peace to the provincial churches.

Therefore, when Sixtus the Third succeeded Celestine, which happened on April 26, 432, according to Baronius, or a few months later, Saint Prosper found it necessary to again defend Augustine's doctrine with his pen, which continued to be brought into disrepute by slanderous writings.

And so that all might know what errors...

Those who opposed such a great teacher were overwhelmed, and he took on the task of refuting the thirteenth conference of Cassian. He indeed surpassed all of Augustine's opponents in doctrine and could not deny the writings he had published. However, he did not want to mention him by name but titled the book 

Cassian had mainly taught this: that the beginning of good will and faith sometimes comes from God and sometimes from man; that the seeds of virtues should be recognized in us; that free will can naturally incline towards good; that this is sometimes preceded by grace but often precedes the gifts of grace. Saint Prosper proves that all these teachings are the consequences of the Pelagian doctrines. From this, it follows that grace is given according to the merits of men; that human nature is not harmed by Adam's sin; that such errors, along with the Pelagian doctrines, were long ago condemned in various councils of bishops and in the letters and decrees of the highest pontiffs; and that finally, Saint Augustine had uprooted and dissipated them from the foundations in many of his writings.

Therefore, Pope Gelasius, around the year 494, in a council of bishops held in Rome, classified Cassian's writings among the apocrypha.

To give as much honor as possible to the excellent work of our Prosper, it seemed useful to readers if we prefaced Prosper's entire response with the thirteenth conference of Cassian. Note: Since we have already published this conference of Cassian among the works of the author himself, we do not think it needs to be reviewed again. Therefore, reader, see our slightly earlier volume 49, where it is included with the other Conferences.

The work, otherwise dangerous by itself, will be read without risk and even with some benefit if it is compared with the invincible response of the distinguished doctor.