Chapter Twelve

Ninth Definition of Cassian: Every soul naturally has seeds of virtues, implanted by the Creator. Refuted because original sin overturns this. Virtues in the wicked are not true, and all their works are unclean. No principles of virtues or merits exist in us before grace. In the minds of the wicked, although there are many praiseworthy things, they are not true virtues. Refutes what the Assembler tried to prove from the apocryphal book of the Shepherd, that a man, even before grace, is equally inclined to good and evil.

Now, let us see where the intention of the debater is leading. It cannot be doubted, he says (Conferences Thirteen, chapter twelve), that every soul naturally has seeds of virtues, implanted by the benefit of the Creator.

But unless these are awakened by the help of God, they cannot reach the growth of perfection. As the blessed Apostle says, neither the one who plants is anything, nor the one who waters, but God who gives the growth.

Moreover, the book called the Shepherd teaches very clearly that man has the freedom to choose in any direction. It is said that two angels adhere to each of us, one good and one bad, and it is in the choice of man to decide whom to follow.

Therefore, free will always remains in man, which can either neglect or love the grace of God.

If it cannot be doubted that every soul naturally has seeds of virtues implanted by the benefit of the Creator: only Adam transgressed, and no one sinned in his sin; we were not conceived in any iniquities, and our mothers did not bear us in any sins (Psalm fifty-one, verse seven); we were not by nature children of wrath, nor were we under the power of darkness (Ephesians two, verse three); with virtues naturally remaining in us, we were rather born children of peace and light (Colossians one, verse thirteen).

Let the insidious deception of false doctrine be far from the minds of the pious. Virtues cannot dwell with vices. For what partnership, says the Apostle, has righteousness with lawlessness? Or what fellowship has light with darkness? (Second Corinthians six, verse fourteen)

For virtue is primarily God: for whom having virtue is the same as being virtue. When we share in this, Christ dwells in us, who is the power of God and the wisdom of God (First Corinthians one, verse twenty-four); faith, hope, charity, self-control, understanding, counsel, fortitude, and other virtues dwell in us. When we depart from this good, everything contrary arises in us.

For when beauty leaves, what succeeds but deformity? When wisdom leaves, what remains but foolishness? When justice does not reign, what dominates but iniquity?

Therefore, the seeds of virtues that were implanted by the benefit of the Creator were overturned by the transgression of the first parent; and they cannot be had unless restored by the one who gave them.

Human nature is reformable by its maker, and it is capable of the goods it had: so that through the mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, it can recover what it lost in the very thing that remains in it.

What remains, however, is a rational soul, which is not virtue, but the dwelling place of virtue. By participating in wisdom, justice, and mercy, we are not wisdom, justice, or mercy; but we are wise, just, and merciful.

These goods, though our rational part is occupied by vices, and the unclean spirit has invaded the temple of God as we transgress, can nevertheless return to the rational part, through him who casts out the prince of this world (John twelve, verse thirty-one), and binds the strong man, and plunders his goods (Mark three, verse twenty-seven), and with the ruler of the world driven out...

The law of the Spirit, 
Thus in the manuscripts of Corbie, Reims, and Jol., along with Mainz and Venice. But Lyon and more recent ones say, grants us the Spirit.
 gives the Spirit who is from God, so that we may understand the things given to us by God. 
First Corinthians
 2:12. But if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, they do not belong to Him. 
Romans
 8:9.

Another Chapter 28.
 But I think this person is deceived by the appearance of truth and errs in the semblance of false virtues, while believing that those good things which can only be had as a gift from God can also be found in the souls of the impious. 
Editions of Lyon, Louvain, Douai, and Cologne think so.
 Because many of them are followers of justice, temperance, continence, and benevolence. All these are not possessed in vain or without benefit, and they gain much honor and glory in this life from them. However, because in these pursuits they serve not God but the devil, although they have a temporary reward from vain praise, they do not belong to the truth of those blessed virtues. 
Editions of Mainz and Venice also.
 And so it is very clear that no virtue dwells in the souls of the impious, but all their works are unclean and polluted, having wisdom that is not spiritual but natural; not heavenly but earthly; not Christian but diabolical; not from the Father of lights but from the prince of darkness. 
Thus in the manuscripts of Corbie, Reims, and Jol., along with editions of Mainz and Venice. But Lyon and later editions say, through those very things which they would not have except by the gift of God, they are subjected to him, etc.
 While even those things which they would not have except by the gift of God, they subject to him who first departed from God.

Therefore, whoever says that without any work of grace, the seeds of all virtues naturally exist in every soul, what does he labor to show except that from these seeds 
Manuscripts of Corbie, Jol., and editions of Mainz and Venice say some seeds.
 some sprouts of merits precede the grace of God? Finally, to seem to attribute something to grace, he says: To reach the growth of perfection, these seeds cannot arrive without the help of God: so that the help of God is encouragement and teaching, and the mind, which is rich in the seeds of virtues, uses the ability it possesses; needing only to be aided to reach the heights of those virtues whose beginnings it knows to exist in itself.

In the recognition of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has now given us everything related to life and godliness through His divine power 
Second Peter
 1:2.

Did he say, "Who has excited within us the seeds of virtues that we naturally possessed with His help?" 

But he said, "Who has now given us everything that pertains to life and godliness."

By saying this, if the beginning of virtue is placed in nature, what is there that has not been given by Him who has given everything? Therefore, the blessed Paul also said: "What do you have that you did not receive? And if you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not?" 
First Corinthians
 4:7.

Therefore, everything that pertains to life and godliness, we do not have by nature, which is corrupted; but we have received it by grace, which restores nature. Nor should we think that the principles of virtues are in natural treasures, because many praiseworthy things are also found in the minds of the impious. These indeed come from nature; but since they have departed from Him who created nature, they cannot be virtues. For what is illuminated by light is light; and what lacks that light is darkness.
        Because the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God 
First Corinthians
 3:19.

And so it is a vice that is thought to be a virtue, since it is foolishness that is thought to be wisdom.

How can it be that those who boast in the seeds of natural virtues, which they themselves magnify, submit those virtues to the teaching that says, "If anyone among you thinks he is wise, let him become a fool so that he may become wise" 
First Corinthians
 3:18?

and, "For since in the wisdom of God, the world through wisdom did not know God, it pleased God through the foolishness of preaching to save those who believe" 
First Corinthians
 1:21.

What about that knowledge and presumption of wisdom that considers itself more awkward and laughable, unless the Spirit of God has subdued the pride of the arrogant and destroyed those arguments that resisted the unknown truth with dogged eloquence by the power of His grace: so that the seed of the word may take root in the plowed soil of the heart, and God's cultivation may produce fruits worthy of eternal barns?

However, that testimony is of no authority which he inserted into his argument from the Shepherd's booklet, from which he wanted to show the contrary suggestions between the good and bad angel.

The persuasions, thus every person is entrusted to their natural judgment and own discretion, so that they have no more protection from God than danger from the devil.

He added the rule of his definition, saying: And therefore free will always remains in a person, which can either neglect or love the grace of God. 

In this view, even what he said, that free will always remains in a person, is, in some part, uncertain. Indeed, many thousands of infants assumed into the kingdom of God, or excluded from the kingdom of God, receive or lose the grace of God without any exercise of their own will. And many who are completely foolish and senseless are rescued from the bonds of eternal death through the sacrament of regeneration. 

Yet let us accept this statement as such, that this definition properly pertains to those who can use free will. Is this freedom so free, that it has as much displeasure to neglect the grace of God as it has pleasure to love it? Has the icy rigor of ancient unbelief been relaxed by no warmth of the midday spirit? And has the numbness of the bound mind from its own coldness been kindled? As the Lord says, 

(Luke 12:49), no spark has reached the cold heart, and the dead ashes have kindled into the flame of love by themselves?

Nothing like this has happened among these lovers of grace, as those experienced who said, 

(Luke 24:32). Nor was that done among them which was done in Lydia, a seller of purple from the city of Thyatira, who among the women to whom the apostle was preaching there, is shown to have believed alone at that time, 

(Acts 16:14).

And according to this view, the safety and power of free will are such that they have love, which is at the summit of all virtues, not as a gift from God, but solely from their own will. What then is repaired in the soul by its builder? Or by what generosity of grace will it be made more adorned, if those things without which the gifts cannot be of benefit are its own? 

But the Apostle, who declares that without love, not works of miracles, not knowledge, not faith, not prophecy, not the distribution of...

Riches alone don't help, nor does enduring the harshest punishments. 

First Corinthians
 13:2-3 says, "If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing."

Love itself is not silent: "Because the love of God has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us" 

Romans
 5:5.

And, "Peace," he says, "to the brothers with love and faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ" 

Ephesians
 6:23. 

Saint John the Apostle also instructs us on how we have begun to share in this good. "Beloved," he says, "let us love one another, for love is from God" 

First John
 4:7.

And lest we might think that love is called from God because of this affection, he says a little later, "Not that we loved God, but that He loved us" 

First John
 4:10, and again, "We love God because He first loved us" 

First John
 4:19.

Therefore, let the utmost poverty recognize this: what is rightly said of any goods is much more rightly said of the one without whom all goods are useless; 

"For what do you have that you did not receive? And if you received it, why do you boast as if you did not receive it?" 

First Corinthians
 4:7.