The Sermons, Prayers, and Historical Narratives of St. Eleutherius of Tournai
SERMON ON THE CONFESSION OF THE HOLY TRINITY
Dearest, confessing Christ Jesus, the Lord of all, and venerating the Holy Trinity in unity, be subject to Him alone, fear the immortal God, to whom belongs honor forever and ever.
The Holy Trinity is God, one God indeed, the Father of the living Word, the perfect one who begets the perfect, who neither had a beginning from anyone nor will have an end in anyone. For He is the Father of the only begotten Son, who is Alpha and Omega, who was and is.
The only Son of God chose to be born from one God the Father, who is the wisdom of the Father, through whom all things were created that exist, that flourish, that have flourished, that will be born, that will perish.
The true Son from the true Father, eternal from eternal, immortal from immortal, incorruptible from incorruptible, invisible from invisible, and the one Holy Spirit, in whom remains the perfect life of believers, in whom is holiness and the source of holiness and minister of true edification: through whom God is in all believers and over all, and the Son, who is through all.
Although the Father is from no one, and the Son proceeds from Him, and the Holy Spirit proceeds from both, these are not three gods, but one true God, whose Trinity is to be venerated in persons, and whose unity is to be adored in substance. The perfect Trinity is glorious, with an everlasting kingdom, an eternal and indivisible reign.
For the Son has never been absent from the Father, nor the Spirit from the Son. The Holy Father is equal to the only begotten Son: the Son is equal to the unbegotten Father in the power of divinity: lesser, however, in assuming our humanity. The Holy Spirit is not lesser than the Father and the Son, but is the coeternal comforter of the sorrowful, strength of the weak, sevenfold, eternal, and the subtle giver of grace.
The true Son is the true image of the paternal light, and the true splendor of internal clarity, wanting all men to come to the knowledge of His name, for their salvation and the cleansing of sins, He descended from heaven to earth. He was incarnated, became man, suffered, and then became obedient unto death.
Of whose obedience the Apostle Paul testifies, saying: Though He was a Son of God, He learned obedience from what He suffered: and having been made perfect, He became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey Him, having been designated by God a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
This same Christ also on the third day rose from the dead, then ascended into heaven, from where He had descended, and led our captivity captive by His marvelous power. Therefore, all who serve the Catholic faith should believe that He will come from there to judge the dead and the living.
The holy and Catholic Church ought to anathematize those who assert that Christ is changeable or mutable.
Therefore, having become man, that is, taking flesh from the holy Virgin Mary, although He became so in the assumption of flesh and blood, He persisted in what He was, naturally and truly as God. Do not say that the flesh has been converted into the nature of deity; nor that the inseparable essence of the Word of God has been changed into the substance of flesh.
For He is inseparable, unchangeable, and unconvertible, and remains the Lord Almighty according to the Scriptures, who is blessed forever and ever. He cannot be greater, He cannot be lesser; He cannot be limited by size, nor comprehended by time. For what is heavenly or divine is known without quantity, and without mass: nor is it contained by any bounds.
Confess the Word of God according to its existence, adore the one Son and our Lord Jesus Christ, not separately, nor place God and man apart, as if joined by the unity of dignity and authority; nor specifically call Christ the Word of God, who is from God, nor similarly another Christ who was born of a woman.
But recognize, venerate, adore only one Christ, the Word of God the Father, with His own flesh. For there is only one Christ, the Son of God, not as if any union is held in the unity of dignity and authority of man and God. Can the nature alone unite the equality of dignity? God forbid.
Peter, the shepherd of the Lord's flock, and John, the chosen virgin, evangelist, and apostle, are of equal dignity to each other.
For this reason, they are called fitting disciples of Christ and witnesses of the truth.
However, each of them is not one.
Therefore, my dearest little children, do not assert that God or the Lord is the Word of Christ, the Father of God.
Lest you again more openly divide the one Christ and Lord into two, and fall into the crime of sacrilege.
Those who make God and the Lord themselves.
Indeed, as we have said, God the Word was united to the flesh according to existence.
God is indeed the ruler of all, the creator of the universe, and the redeemer of humans with His most precious blood.
However, he clearly denies unity, who divides into two Christs Him who is one.
He is an apostate, and truly unhappy, truly to be subjected to perpetual torment.
The devil and his angels rise up in plunder against him, evil spirits meet the reception of his soul.
Innumerable torments are prepared for him, and the evils he has done in his life are set before his eyes.
Therefore, so that you do not end up in these terrible places, confess that Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, is understood as one, to be venerated with His own flesh in one servitude.
Confess with a pure mind, praise with a perfect heart, glorify with a kind mouth, the only-begotten Son of God born from God the Father.
Although He was naturally free from suffering, for us, according to the Scriptures, He suffered in the flesh.
And in the crucified body of His own flesh, He was impassibly referring to the passion.
But by the grace of God, He tasted death for all men, even giving His own body, although He is naturally life and the resurrection of the dead.
For to trample on death with His ineffable power, and admirable virtue, and inestimable magnificence, and to be the firstborn from the dead in His flesh, and the first fruits of those who have fallen asleep, and to make a way for human nature to return to incorruption, by the grace of God, as mentioned, He tasted death for all and rose on the third day, stripping the most savage jaws of hell.
And therefore, although it is said that the resurrection of the dead was made through man, you must understand that the Word made man, which is from God, and through Him the power of death was destroyed.
As the Scripture attests, in the last times, the one Son and Lord will come in the glory of the Father, to judge the world in equity.
It is also necessary for you to believe in the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, His birth, circumcision, apparition, Gospels, passion, death, resurrection, and ascension into heaven.
For this is the correct faith.
But since the virgin conceived God united with flesh according to existence, the virgin gave birth, therefore profess her as the mother of Christ.
Not that the nature of the Word obtained the beginning of existence from the flesh.
For in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
And He is the creator of the ages, the Father of the universe.
Indeed, there are three that give testimony in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit.
These three are one.
Therefore, confess the creator of all as one in substance, a Trinity in persons, so that you may merit to reach the heavenly joys, where the merits of the saints flourish, whose joy and exultation will not cease forever, reigning our Lord Jesus Christ, with the coeternal Father, with the cooperating grace of the Holy Spirit, to whom be praise, dominion, through all ages of ages.
Amen.
A Historical Narrative on The Passing of Saint Eleutherius
In those times, while the blessed Eleutherius was the second bishop of the Church of Tournai, a great dispute arose among the clergy of Tournai. Some heretics were introducing certain new ideas of their own heresy and trying to destroy the preaching of the truth. They dared to corrupt the mystery of the divine dispensation and denied that the heavenly messenger had announced the virgin birth. Other heretics, causing confusion, wrongly claimed that the nature of the flesh and the deity were one, spreading the confusion that the divine nature of the only begotten was passible and impudently asserting that the pure man born of the most blessed Virgin Mary. Others opposed the Holy Spirit. However, those devoted to and serving God believed in the truth, not obeying falsehood.
The dispute was so great that the heretics even attacked the Catholic children of the Church of Tournai, and many were killed and drowned in the river called the Scheldt. At the same time, the blessed bishop of the Church of Tournai had gone to Rome and had brought back with him the head of Mary of Egypt. He had secretly received it from the Roman Church of the blessed Apostle Peter and brought it to the Church of Mary, Mother of Christ.
Thus, the man of God, returning from Rome, was received with great joy by all the people. The clergy, dressed in dalmatics, went to meet their blessed pastor, but suddenly the joy of all was doubled. For the bishop brought the relics of the blessed Mary, who had endured so many and such great sufferings. When he entered the gate of Nervia, a great miracle from God was revealed in that place. As the joyful people and the ranks of the clergy came forward, the blessed bishop, clothed in his cloak, ascended the hill called the Mount of Hidden Treasure, now called Mount Saint Andrew, and showed the relics of Saint Mary of Egypt and the Shoulder of the blessed Stephen the Protomartyr to all the people. Suddenly, a certain brightness appeared from heaven around the relics of the head of Saint Mary, which was seen by all until it entered the church of the Mother of Christ. Around the Shoulder of the blessed Stephen, a brighter light appeared in the form of a silver circle.
When he entered the church, surrounded by the entire crowd of people, four men and two women, who were suffering from a great illness called the fire of hell, were present. Then the man of God, moved by compassion, placed the head before the women and the shoulder before the men, saying: Let us all pray. As they prostrated themselves and prayed, he said: Saint Stephen the Protomartyr, help these people: Saint Mary, have mercy on this female sex. We will not rise from prayer until they are made well. At this word, all were healed. The flesh they had lost due to the illness was restored at that very hour. A mute man standing by also spoke, saying: Behold the relics of the blessed Stephen and Saint Mary. Then all were amazed and astonished.
In those times, the relics of the saints were not placed in gold or silver. These events took place on October 5th. Blessed Eleutherius had indeed ruled the Church of Tournai for 31 years and the Church of Blandin for 9 years. When he heard that the children of the Church were disturbed, he grieved. Then, by the authority of the Roman pope, he decreed that all heretics should be expelled from the city so that they might confess Christ, the Son of God the Father, with one accord. Thus, compelled by the bishop, they chose a fitting day on which Bishop Eleutherius of Christ would convene their synod. The day arrived when the synod was convened, and the Catholic children came, confounding the sect of the heretics. Some of the heretics who opposed them were also present. Then the holy man of God, Eleutherius, rose and, making a sign for silence with his hand, said: Listen, all who confess the Lord, the Father, and His Son, with the Holy Spirit.
Sermon on the Trinity
Believe in one God, the all-powerful Father, and in His only Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who was born from God the Father as the only begotten Son, immeasurable from the immeasurable, immortal from the immortal, invisible from the invisible, eternal from the eternal, through whom and with whom the Father made all things contained in heaven, on earth, or in the sea.
Therefore, I urge you, beloved, believe that our Lord Jesus Christ came down from heaven for the salvation of humanity and the liberation of the world, was incarnate, and suffered as a man under the governor Pilate. Furthermore, on the third day, He rose from the dead, and again ascended into heaven, from where He had descended. These decrees, my most beloved children, you must hold and observe. You must devoutly obey them if you wish to earn heavenly joys. Obey these doctrines and decrees of the ancient Fathers, considering and clearly understanding what it means to be incarnate and that the Word of God became human.
For you should not assert that the nature of God changed, but rather that He joined to Himself a rational soul and animated flesh, and that Christ, the Son of God, became irreproachably, ineffably, substantially human, and was also called the son of man.
Therefore, Christ Jesus, who was born from the eternal Father before all ages, was also physically born from a woman, that is, the blessed Virgin Mary, not because His heavenly nature began from the holy Virgin, nor did He need to be born a second time, after that glorious birth He had from the Father. For it is not fitting, but rather foolish, to affirm that our Lord Jesus Christ, who is coeternal with the Father before all ages, needed a second generation from the Father, so that through the one He took on in the Virgin, He began to be.
However, the holy universal Catholic Church affirms and believes that for the salvation of humanity and the cleansing of sins, He joined human nature to Himself; and proceeded from the virginal womb, a pure womb, but most worthily preserved by heavenly angels. Therefore, the Catholic Fathers assert, and we by the authority of our elders, that He was born physically. He, being kind and merciful, wishing to turn all to the path of divinity, joined flesh to Himself from that virginal and uncontaminated womb, as said above, and underwent a physical birth, making His own birth from His own flesh.
Then believe that He was crucified, and on the third day rose from the dead: not because God the Word in His nature was struck under the governor Pilate, then affixed to the cross, or because He endured for us the piercings of the lance and nails, and so many wounds (for God is incorporeal and beyond suffering), but because that body, which became His own, endured these things for us. For this reason, it is said that He suffered all these things for all people for the redemption of sins. For in that body which suffered, God was present, who could in no way suffer.
Similarly, you should understand His death. For naturally, the life-giving Word of God is incorruptible and immortal. But because by the grace of God, His own body, according to the judgment of the teacher of the nations Paul, tasted death, it is said that God suffered death for us, not because He Himself experienced death, as far as His nature is concerned (for it would not be fitting, but rather absurd to assert this), but as we said above, His true flesh tasted death.
So, with His flesh rising again, affirm the resurrection, not because it fell into decay, but because His body rose again. Therefore, beloved, I beseech your brotherhood to devoutly worship the true God, and His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, adore with a kind heart, praise with a pure mind, confess with tearful sighs, not glorifying Him as a man with words, lest you introduce a kind of division, but honor Him as one and the same: because His body (with which He also sits with the Father) is not separate from the Word. Nor should you testify as if there were two sons sitting, but one with flesh through unity.
Your faith must believe that Christ, our Lord, became the mediator between God and humans, and the reconciler to bring peace with God the Father on our behalf, offering himself as a pleasing fragrance. For this reason, he said through the prophet:
"You did not desire sacrifice and offering; burnt offerings for sin did not please you, but you prepared a body for me. It is written about me in the scroll, that I should do your will, God."
He did not offer his own body for himself, but for us as a pleasing fragrance.
My brothers, who among you still doubts that the true and spotless Lamb was sacrificed for the salvation of the human race and was crucified by the wicked Jews? He is the one who redeemed us through his marvelous power and the ineffable might of his divinity, defeated the rebellious and proud Jews, and stripped the gates of hell, bringing out the captives from their chains and sending out those imprisoned in the places of darkness, crying out and saying:
"O good conqueror of the world, O holy defeater of the devil's deceit, our cries awaited you, most merciful Jesus, in these torments, our sighs called out to you, merciful Christ, in the gloomy places of the weeping. Behold, you have come, whom we awaited from ancient times. Free us, whom we once devotedly worshiped on earth."
He is the one who, after the destruction of the devil and the liberation of the saints from the darkness, rose on the third day and, ascending into the heavenly kingdom, sits at the right hand of God the Father. He is the Son of Mary, who conceived as a virgin by the Holy Spirit, who gave birth to both God and man while remaining a virgin even after giving birth, and who remained the Virgin and Mother of the Savior.
As mentioned above, he offered himself as a spotless sacrifice, a sacrifice pleasing to God the Father. But if anyone says that he offered this sacrifice for himself as well as for us, they will not escape the ultimate punishment but will suffer eternal torment with the wicked. Regarding the Holy Spirit, when he spoke with his disciples:
"He will glorify me,"
understand, my children, that Christ is one and the Son, not needing another's glory, but confess that he received glory from the Holy Spirit because the Spirit is superior to him, better than him. Although in his essence, the Spirit is his, and is understood in his personal property, according to which the Spirit is his and the Son, he is not separate from him.
He is called the Spirit of Truth, and Christ is the Truth. Therefore, the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son in the same way as from the Father. For the Holy Spirit, performing miracles through the hands of the holy apostles, glorified God, Jesus Christ, after his glorious resurrection, ascended into heaven (from where he had descended for the liberation of our souls). Therefore, Christ is believed by us and many other Catholic men to be God by nature, demonstrating his virtues and glorious miracles through his Spirit to the nations spread throughout the world. Hence, our Lord Jesus Christ said that
"He will take from what is mine and announce it to you."
But the same Holy Spirit is not said to be powerful or wise by another's participation because he is perfect in all things and needs no good at all.
For the Holy Spirit is believed to be the paternal virtue and heavenly wisdom, that is, the Son, and therefore, by the very fact and virtue of his subsistence, virtue and wisdom are proven. Beloved brothers, this is the true faith, and it must be held by all Catholic men, for unless one believes firmly and rightly, they cannot be freed from the company of the devil. Confess one substance, three persons, so that you may be worthy to reach the heavenly kingdom and enjoy eternal goods forever, where the angels rejoice, the apostles are glad, the glorious crowd of martyrs exults, the company of confessors and virgins applaud, whom the Redeemer of the world crowns with an eternal laurel, who lives and reigns as God, almighty, invisible, eternal, incorruptible, to whom is honor, praise, glory, and dominion, undying power, unfading majesty, perpetual glory, and ineffable virtue with the Father and the Holy Spirit for infinite ages of ages. Amen.
But if anyone contradicts these decrees from the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit...
Meanwhile, for five years, the Church of Tournai, during which the indomitable priest survived, was elevated by the Catholic men. In the meantime, the part of the heretics was confused. What should they do? They took counsel, inquiring what should be done about him, and they said: If he prevails among us, our lives will be despised; but if we prevail, we will gain the victory of praise.
So, as they were conversing one day, behold, the blessed Pope, with the deacon Athanasius and the faithful disciple Audoenus, was leaving the church of Blessed Mary of Tournai; the heretics, seeing him and hidden behind a corner (for they lay in wait for him in many ways), said: Behold, the destroyer of our law, come, let us kill him. So, raising their clubs, they struck him hard and, leaving him half-dead in front of the church, secretly went away after inflicting wounds on him. Similarly, the disciples, leaving their shepherd, fled.
When Censorinus Caesar heard this, he would have had them all nailed to the cross, had it not been for the prayer of the man of God: a tumult arose throughout the city, the young men shouted, the matrons lamented, and the virgins sprinkled themselves with ashes, the old men hastened to see the half-dead prelate, and he lay lifeless, blood flowing from his holy head and from both sides.
Then, as he had requested, a bed of haircloth was prepared by the citizens of the city, and he was carried into his house: living for five more weeks, in that infirmity, he gave sight to a blind man and cured several sick people. Therefore, the end of the days of the most blessed Eleutherius approached, he called his brothers and the followers of the true religion, and openly received the body and blood of Christ, predicting that he would leave the bodily prison within the same week.
What could they do? They saw that their father desired heavenly things and wept that he was already about to leave the Christians, to whom he gently spoke: I am about to enter the end of all flesh, to receive the eternal joys promised to me by the Lord. I urge you, dearest ones, to flee hatred, sow concord, dissolve schisms, pursue virtue, endure temporary evils for your judge, so that you may deserve to present the worthy fruit of penance to Christ. For every man is like grass, and his flesh is like the stubble of the field. In the morning it blooms and flourishes, in the evening it withers and fades. Be patient, remain chaste, fear the Lord, persevere in all good things. For you have heard David saying: Man is made like vanity.
Therefore, we are dust, and in judgment, we will rise before the tribunal of Christ, as Scripture testifies, we will all stand. With these words said, such brightness shone upon the town where he was born, that all who came to the funeral of such a Father, being almost out of their minds, saw his spirit lifted by an angel in a cloud, and with the brightness of the cloud, penetrating the heavens, and the brightness flying with him, no longer appearing. Thus, bathed in the wave of sacred blood, the true martyr and confessor departed in peace. The day before the Kalends of July.
These things were done by the heretics on the seventh day before the Kalends of June, and in that same year, the blessed Eleutherius fell asleep in peace, reigning our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be honor and power through all ages of ages. Amen.
Sermon on the Incarnation of the Lord
Fatherly authority encourages brotherly love to have faith and gently urges it to abstain from evil.
We cry out, but no mortal listens.
We call upon Christ, and Christ in heaven hears us.
Nevertheless, let the unbelievers listen faithfully, and the foolish understand wisely.
We believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of all things visible and invisible.
We worship Christ, the perfect Son of the perfect Father.
We revere the Paraclete, the Spirit proceeding from both the Father and the Son.
Just as the Father is without beginning, so too the Son, whose Father is God, remains without beginning.
The Only-begotten, descending from the Unbegotten, has always been God, who has always remained the Son, whose Father we confess to be God.
Before the world was made, the Father had the Word, possessed wisdom, and did not lose power.
The Catholic Fathers testify that the Word is the power and wisdom of God, which we do not doubt has always existed.
To believe more certainly that wisdom has existed from the beginning, let us hear what is clearly said:
"I came forth from the mouth of the Most High."
When the Most High established the firmament, secured the earth, and the fountain of water burst forth from the deep abyss, I was with the Father in the highest places, arranging all things with Him.
And again it is said:
"All wisdom is from the Lord God, and it was always with Him, and is before all time."
To show that the Word existed from the beginning, the Father more clearly declares, saying:
"My heart has uttered a good Word" (Psalm Forty-Five: One).
We believe that He is God, while the Father always remains:
because the Word, Wisdom, and Strength are His Son.
The prophets have foretold the birth of the Virgin Mary.
Concerning the birth of Christ, the prophet Isaiah testifies, saying:
"Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Counselor, Mighty God; His authority and kingdom shall last forever" (Isaiah Nine: Seven).
Thus, the Only-begotten of the Unbegotten Father, Christ, according to the flesh, was born from the seed of David, made a visible man, whose Father is the invisible God.
It was necessary for the human race that the Virgin conceive Him whom the Father had begotten as invisible from the beginning, that the Virgin should bring forth for us as visible, and remain a virgin after childbirth.
And He, who was begotten without a woman's union from the heavenly Father before all ages, was born a perfect man from the virginal womb, without a carnal father.
For the Holy Spirit, entering the virginal chamber of modesty, caused such a Christ, made man, to proceed from her, who would restore what was lost and forgive all sins, who, innocent, would shed His innocent blood for the redemption of human frailty, and through the visible man, the invisible God would present His Only-begotten visible to men.
Therefore, Jesus Christ was born in the flesh and circumcised on the eighth day.
In whose circumcision, just as circumcision ended, so through the baptism of Christ, the consecration of baptism had its beginning.
The water of the Jordan did not sanctify Him by washing, but the waters were purified by the Son of God entering them.
Thus, as the Father had foretold through His prophets, a virgin conceived, and the creature brought forth her Creator on earth.
He rose on the third day after His passion and ascended into heaven, witnessed by the apostles.
Of His glorious passion, the Apostle Paul writes to the Philippians, saying:
"Though He was in the form of God, He did not count equality with God something to be grasped, but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and being found in human form, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross" (Philippians Two: Six to Eight).
Therefore, we, thinking of God this way, do not say that He was a mere man born of the Virgin Mary, nor do we preach one Son of Man and another Son of God separately, lest we make one person of the flesh and another of divinity, but we profess and believe in one Christ in the Word of God and in the flesh, and we testify and worship Him as the Only-begotten Son by nature.
We also openly declare that the Word of God took the beginning of flesh and blood, and made our body His own specifically, and came forth as a perfect man from the virgin, yet not from this world.
Heavenly power was cast down, so that it would lose the generation it had from the eternal Father. This indeed is what the reason of the Catholic faith testifies.
In this religion, we have learned that the holy Fathers and God's chosen soldiers were true contenders, who truly believed that the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ was a virgin. Not because the deity and nature of the Word took origin from her, but because that most sacred body of Christ, animated by a rational soul, was born from the pure womb of the same virgin, to which the Word of God was substantially united and born in the flesh.
Hence, the Apostle Paul, writing to the Thessalonians, says:
Therefore, we who worship this holy faith and follow Christian law profess that according to substance, the Word of God is unified with the flesh, and we worship one Christ, God, the same human with his own flesh. We truly testify with our hearts, proclaim with a pure mind, and confess with a humble mouth that the Son of God was crucified in the flesh, suffered death in the flesh, and became the firstborn from the dead, in whom remains the perfect life of believers, who as God is the life-giver of all the faithful.
I write these things, beloved, so that peace and harmony of the Churches may be preserved, and the indissoluble bond of charity may remain, and the gifts of divine generosity may not diminish.
We venerate and believe in the Trinity in unity and believe that the Father and the Son were from the beginning, and we confess and honor the Paraclete proceeding from both, not as three gods, but as one God only: to whom we faithfully offer our dues, so that our Lord and Redeemer, who performs such great miracles in His servants, may not disdain to forgive our sins, and we will see greater things than these, with His help whose majesty and beauty, unfading glory, power, and honor remain inestimable forever and ever. Amen.
Sermon on the Nativity of the Lord
Behold, now is the acceptable time, behold, now is the day of salvation.
Behold, in these days we see fulfilled what is spoken by the voice of the prophet Isaiah:
Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and his name shall be called Emmanuel.
Behold, a virgin has conceived without male seed, a virgin has given birth without any carnal corruption.
The birth of this same son increases the joy of the human people:
at his birth, the enemy of our substance is confounded with sorrow.
Indeed, that adversary of ours, who rose as Lucifer at dawn, who delighted in the food of the delights of God's paradise, fell from heaven and deserved to hear:
If you have been exalted like an eagle, you will be brought down shamefully by the Lord.
That enemy of human substance, who had said he would be like the Most High, fell through pride, roaring like a lion, seeking whom he may devour.
He does not seek the unfaithful man, not the angry man, not those who are outside, but seeks to bring down the humble, modest, rational person, or someone from the Church of Christ.
This envious one sent man, ejected from the paradise of God, into this misery and valley of tears, and wanted to separate the blessed Job from God, but could not.
To this spotless and simple man it is said: His strength is in his loins, and his power in his navel.
Therefore, through the disobedience of the first man, death and misery entered the world:
but through the birth of the second man, salvation and joy entered.
The star gave the sun:
the virgin gave birth to God as man without a man;
the rod gave birth to the flower.
If Mary had not remained a virgin, she certainly would not have given birth to the Son of God.
Oh, how praiseworthy is virginity!
The most blessed Isaiah says: A virgin shall come forth from the root of Jesse, and a flower shall ascend from his root (Isaiah 11:1).
The virgin is the mother of Christ, simple, humble, and spotless, adhering to no external seed, and fruitful by union with the image of God.
It was indeed necessary for men that a virgin should conceive the Son of God, troublesome for Satan, but fruitful for us.
Of that flower which the rod of Jesse brought forth, it is written:
I am the flower of the field and the lily of the valleys.
If virginity did not benefit a virgin, the prophet would not have signified that a Virgin would be born of a Virgin.
However, widowhood is excellent, but virgin chastity is better.
The law of Moses, however, was given differently.
It is written: Blessed is he who has seed in Zion.
And Cursed is the barren woman who does not give birth.
And elsewhere: There was no infirm person among their tribes.
But in the law of our Lord Jesus Christ it is said: Rejoice, barren one: do not consider yourself a dry tree.
You will have a place for your sons and daughters forever.
Now even he who is weak becomes stronger, as the Apostle testifies, who says: I will gladly boast in my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may dwell in me.
Therefore, because Christ was born before all ages from the eternal Father, it was the ineffable sacrament of divine power.
But when he appeared to us visibly from the virgin, as a man, it was for the sake of human salvation.
Death entered the world through Eve; lost life is restored through Mary.
After the Virgin conceived him in her womb, the Virgin gave birth to the light that illuminates every man coming into this world:
His government is upon his shoulder, who is the mighty God, the everlasting Father (Isaiah 9:7).
The curse pronounced against the whole human race was lifted.
Who could comprehend this secret of divine counsel, that a Virgin would conceive in the womb, that the Virgin would give birth to God, begotten of the Father before all, without a mother?
And the invisible God would appear through a visible man, and, assuming the condition of human mortality, would suffer death, conceived by no law of bodily generation but coming forth from the original womb under human law, and the same Mother would remain a virgin incorrupt?
Thus, Christ, born without a mother before the ages from the invisible Father, necessary not for himself but for the human race, is born a second time without a carnal father from a visible mother.
And since we were in danger through the disobedience of the first woman, it was fitting that we should be saved through a woman.
Let the human race rejoice, for Christ is born, and wrapped in humble swaddling clothes, is laid in a manger of animals.
The humility of the swaddling clothes is indeed a great and ineffable sacrament.
The cloths are worshipped by the Magi, and they offer gold, frankincense, and myrrh to the child lying in the manger, who reigns above the angelic creatures.  Gold is fitting for a king, the offering of frankincense for a great priest, and myrrh for the burial of the dead. Gold signifies the Son of God born of the Virgin, now reigning on earth. Frankincense signifies the high priest offering himself as a sacrifice to the Heavenly Father on our behalf. Myrrh signifies the same Son of the Virgin being buried and rising again for the salvation of the human race.
The swaddling clothes with which the Virgin mother wraps the infant represent our sins, as the prophet says: "Truly he has taken our infirmities, and carried our sorrows." Through these humble cloths, it is evident that he has taken on our sins. The fact that he is placed between two animals is an inestimable mystery of God. Behold, it is fulfilled what the voice of the prophet Habakkuk says: "Lord, I have heard your report, and I was afraid; I considered your works and was astonished: in the midst of two animals." It is fitting that the Son of Man is placed among humble animals. He is the life of men, the nourishment of angels, and the food of beasts. It was necessary that he who was the living bread be placed in a manger between two animals. He is the one who says: "I am the living bread that came down from heaven." He is the spotless lamb, whose untouched body, after being handled by the priest and consumed by all the faithful, remains unblemished and unconsumed.
After the prophecy about the Virgin's birth was fulfilled and the patriarchs' proclamations were realized, and all that was to be done regarding Christ through the angel Gabriel was completed, it was fitting that a new man, coming from a pure man, a virgin born from a virgin, would acquire a new family for himself: so that he who was worshipped by angels in heaven would also establish angels for himself on earth. Then he wanted to be baptized by John, the king by a soldier, the Lord by a servant. Not because he had committed any crimes, but so that our sins would be erased through his baptism. The water did not cleanse him; rather, by entering it, he blessed it, he who baptized in Spirit and truth. Then, announcing the word of life and truth to the people, he found some to be disciples and others to be evangelists. The twin brothers, James and John, left their father Zebedee and the boat to follow the Savior, unanimously giving up family care and blood ties.
After this, many other disciples were told by the Lord Jesus: "If anyone wants to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me." Thus, the divine Scripture contains it: No soldier goes to battle with his wife. If anyone wants to follow the footsteps of the Redeemer, let him leave everything behind and not look back, like Lot's wife did: "No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God." If anyone has the means to redeem his soul from the enemy's deceit, let him feed the poor, practice hospitality, and clothe the naked or those in shabby clothing.
When Christ wanted to ascend from earth to heaven, to move from the lower parts to the higher, as he had foretold his disciples long before, he endured death to free the dead from sin. He preached to show us the way of salvation. He rose again to make the resurrected live. Following in his footsteps, beloved, let us not please ourselves but God and our neighbor. Thus, when Jesus announced peace to the people, he said to his disciples: "I did not come to do my will, but the will of him who sent me." While the Son of Man fulfilled the will of God, the Jews said he sinned against God, but in reality, by not receiving the Son whom he had sent, they reproached the Father, and therefore they unjustly crucified the innocent Son of God. Thus, the sins of the sinners fell upon Christ, who, though innocent, was killed as if he were a blasphemer. Then the victorious Lord Jesus, stripping the places of darkness, rose on the third day and happily ascended to heaven from where he had descended. How did humanity ascend unless the Deity first descended to the lower parts of the earth to unite with human nature? The heavenly Deity descended so that the Redeemer could ascend.
Humanity.
He is one and the same person, always in the Father, always with the Father, and always has been with the Father.
After the ascension, he also sent the Holy Spirit, appearing in fiery tongues to the disciples.
The Spirit is indeed the power of the Son, which came from him and healed everyone.
It is said, however, to proceed from the Father and is usually referred to him: from whom he is also, and what is his.
For Christ himself testifies, saying:  "My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me."
The Son has from the Father that he is God. For he is from God, God.
From him, he has that the Holy Spirit proceeds from him.
Therefore, dearest brothers, let us with due reverence celebrate the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Let us flee from pride, lest we be overwhelmed in hell, like the evil angels.
For in pride, man is inflated, shaken by greed, and delighted by ambition.
Do not boast of worldly riches; do not prefer yourselves to others, lest evil thoughts creep in.
And you who now desire gilded clothes, be pleased to sit in rags, so that you may please Christ: to whom is honor with the invisible Father through all ages of ages. Amen.
Sermon on the Feast of the Annunciation
On the threefold celebration of the Blessed Virgin Mary, dear brothers, in which the angel announces, the Virgin conceives, the only-begotten Son of the unbegotten is clothed in flesh, a few things must be said. Although he who announces is worthy of great praise, she who conceives by hearing is worthier; most worthy, however, is He who is conceived.
This is the day of salvation, celebrated by us with due reverence, which reconciles the earthly with the heavenly; on which the divinity of the Redeemer descended to us, so that our humanity might ascend to the heavens.
This is that solemn day which begins with the angel announcing how the Virgin will give birth to the one born of a Virgin, how the power of the Most High overshadowed the Virgin, how the untouchable God deigned to be touched, who is the eternal light that illuminates everyone coming into this world.
This is the solemn day which lifts and elevates us from the earth to the heights and honorably exalts us above the heavens of heavens, as the present sermon will declare to you.
Since the first man was expelled by the forbidden tree of knowledge and inappropriately tasted it, the deceit of demons led humans astray through the allure of vices, deceived them, captivated them by deceiving, and in captivity, plunged them into outer darkness. There is weeping and gnashing of teeth, as the Lord testifies.
For when the glory of the devil aroused ambition, ambition provoked envy, and the human race was grieved to be transferred from the earth to the heavens. For because he had miserably fallen, he inflicted the solace of his misery upon himself by this.
Therefore, considering the Father, the loss of the human race through the deceit of the serpent, He deigned to liberate the world by the incarnation of His only-begotten Son, so that as the woman was expelled from the seats of paradise by the exhortation of the demon, she might merit to receive the glory of immortality by the angel's salutation.
The exhortation of the enemy deceived Eve; the salutation of Gabriel strengthened Mary. The angel announces to destroy the deceit of the devil: the Virgin is overshadowed by the power of the Most High, with the angel announcing, so that the woman long deceived by Satan's messenger is restored.
The incorruptible God is clothed in flesh and descends, so that by this, according to man, Jesus, the old man might ascend, who, by inappropriately tasting the fruit, came to this misery and valley of tears. For it is read that when the woman deceived her husband, it was said to her by the Lord: In pain, you will bear children, and your desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you.
These three inconveniences are suffered by those who do not imitate the virginity of Mary: as if the Lord were saying to her: When your desire is for your husband, you will be subject to his servitude; but when you give birth, you will suffer the detriments of pain and sorrow. But these three are excluded from the happiness of the Virgin Mary, and not only from that Virgin, but from all who devote their virginity to Christ.
Come therefore, virgins, who vow virginity to the Virgin, vow the integrity of the body to the Virgin, who exhibited unstained chastity to the Lord. Therefore, listen to how much merit that same Virgin possessed. For she not only merited to be visited by the angelic address but also to encompass within the confines of her virginal womb Him who in no way could be encompassed.
Our mother Eve is burdened with three evils, but blessed Mary is excluded from these and rejoices in a threefold happiness. For she is strengthened by the angelic salutation, blessed after being strengthened, and announced to be fruitful with the fullness of grace.
For it is written: The angel was sent to the virgin. We confess that this virgin is she of whom it is read in Isaiah: A shoot will come up from the stump of Jesse (that is, the Virgin Mary), and from his roots a Branch will bear fruit, that is, Christ. For He himself declares in the Song of Songs, saying: I am the flower of the field. And entering, he said to her: Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with you. Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb.
Oh, the angelic voice full of sweetness and joy! For when he said, Hail, Mary, he exhibited a heavenly salutation to the Virgin. But when he said, Full of grace, he showed that the sentence was excluded, by which the first parents were made far from God, and the grace of heavenly blessing restored.
Through her, they were freed from slavery and brought into paradise.
When he said, "Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb," he not only declared her womb's fruit blessed but also all those who, following the Virgin Mary, remain in virginity.
O blessed Virgin, O Virgin chosen by the Creator of the world! You will conceive Him who was born before all ages, without a mother from the eternal Father, becoming a mother without the union of any man.
In this case, the ear was the spouse, and the angelic word was the husband. You will conceive as a virgin, and after giving birth, you will remain a virgin, and the Son of God will descend into you, so that He who was to ascend with the power of supremacy and the glory of His majesty to the East, may turn His grace of majesty to the West.
Do not let hearing this confuse you, nor let the conception disturb you. This conception is not by necessity but by the incomprehensible power of God. He will be clothed in flesh and hidden in your virginal womb, and the Son of God will begin to be the son of man, always remaining what He was. We believe Him to be unchangeable, mercifully taking on what He was not, so that He can be comprehended in you, whom the whole world could not contain.
Through this conception, your virginal chastity will not be diminished but rather the integrity of your chastity will be more greatly amplified. You have become the Mother of the Creator while He was with the Father: and when He was born from you, His Mother, He remained with the Father. Always with the Father, because He has no beginning and no temporal origin. Always with the Father, who remains without beginning and end.
You have become the heavenly ladder, the rod of Aaron that blossomed above all, that is, you shone with dignity in virginity above all others. You have become the ladder by which heavenly glory descended to the lower realms, so that humility might be lifted to the heights of heaven.
O new and unheard-of union! O ineffable and wondrous mixture! For He who created everything from nothing is created; He who could not be contained is comprehended; He who makes all rich becomes poor; Christ, who is perfect, deigns to empty Himself.
It is said that He emptied Himself of the form of divinity in time so that we might be enriched by His heavenly perfection.
Therefore, dearest brothers, let us beseech the Virgin to reconcile God to mankind and harmonize earthly things with heavenly ones. Let her intercede for the past, praying to the Son for the future.
O Virgin, give not only bodily food but also the bread of angels descending into your womb, so that we may fear the Son of God. For the beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord.
If anyone fears the Lord, they will keep His commandments: then carnal purification will follow, so that we may be able to contemplate the rays of divine light. After carnal purification is given to us, the illumination of our hearts will follow.
Listen, therefore, and incline your ear to our prayers. O Virgin, who is rightly praised by us, who is venerated by us for remaining a virgin after giving birth, pray to God for us, so that He may grant us constancy, bestow patience: so that unity may be strengthened, tolerance increased so that when the pain of sorrow and misery, calamity, and sadness comes, you may deem us worthy to present us to your only-begotten Son, who is one God: whom we confess as one in substance, three in persons.
Who is in all, and over all, and in all of us; who is sought in part, and known in part: who does not want the death of the sinner, but that he may turn from his wicked way.
Pray that we may become perfect light; so that we may praise you in the glory of your Son: to whom is honor and power, through all ages. Amen.
Prayer of Blessed Eleutherius, Commending His Soul to God for the Faith and the Church of Tournai
The Catholic faith believes and confesses not in three gods, but in one God, worships and venerates Him.
Unity remains in the Trinity: the perfect Trinity consists in unity.
The true God, our Lord Jesus Christ, was born from the true Father according to divinity; according to humanity, He was born of the unstained virgin.
The Holy Spirit proceeds from both, who turns the hearts of unbelievers to the acknowledgment of truth.
The Son is equal to the unbegotten Father, the Holy Spirit is equal to the only-begotten Son; the Son, the eternal light, proceeds from the eternal light: an unfailing lamp shines forth from that invisible brightness.
When the Virgin Mary, the Mother of the eternal Judge, was foretold to conceive by the Holy Spirit, and remaining a virgin, brought forth the Son of God to the earth, and after the miraculous birth, while maintaining her virginity, nourished Jesus Christ with divine milk.
Oh, that holy angelic announcement!
The angel Gabriel is sent to a Virgin unaware of the mystical matter.
The Mother of the Redeemer is likened to a servant when she responds to the angel; she says:
"Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to your word."
Therefore, the Son of God, made flesh, to fulfill the word of the angel, was born of the glorious Virgin by divine inspiration: He is laid in a manger, then announced by an angel to shepherds.
He rules all things reigning in heaven, and the little Son of God lies in a manger.
He is nourished by the virgin mother, and adored by the wise men with gifts.
To show us the humility of His power and the magnificence of His divinity, He possessed all things, as a man without sin.
He had no sin, endured death, and by His death offered us eternal life.
Oh, the wondrous birth of the only-begotten Son of God!
Oh, the marvelous preaching of the Son of Man!
Oh, the unheard-of wisdom of such a young man!
The Son of God appeared in the synagogues and convinced all the scribes and doctors of the law by the Holy Spirit: yet He did not lack any power from the Holy Spirit, as He was the Son of God.
For the Son, who is co-eternal with the eternal Father, never needed the help of another, because He is perfect and blessed forever.
Wise men marvel at wisdom unheard of in the world.
For this reason, the Son of Man, betrayed by the impious and most wicked traitor Judas, is scourged by the Jews and followed with reproaches.
Thus, Christ Jesus, who lowered Himself to voluntary humiliation for the sake of human frailty, indeed offered His own body, not for Himself, but for our redemption, to the eternal Father as a true sacrifice, a sacrifice pleasing to God in a sweet-smelling aroma.
For what sacrifice or offering would He need when He existed free from all sin, as God?
Since all have sinned and need the grace of God, for human nature was sickened by sins and evil deeds: He, however, was not so, although He took the form of a servant and willingly accepted death.
The prophet David spoke of our Lord Jesus Christ when he said:
"Restore to me the joy of your salvation, and uphold me with a willing spirit" (Psalm 51).
For the Father is the beginning of all things, with whom the Son made all things, the King of kings, the Father of the universe, and the reformer of the decaying world.
Amid these words, the holy man's pain from wounds and heart severely constrained him.
What could he do?
He saw the day of his death approaching and knew that the churches he had built within the walls were about to fall.
Thus, he turned with tears and prayed, saying:
Almighty, most merciful God, who in your three holy patriarchs, namely Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, willed that your glorious name be invoked with a triple invocation, that through your only-begotten Son Jesus, the followers of the Catholic faith might recognize and fully believe that you are God in the perfect Trinity, the unbegotten Father, equal to the only-begotten Son, and comparable to the Holy Spirit: true Father, who begot the true Son before the foundation of the world and before the establishment of things, who sent the Holy Spirit proceeding from you from heaven to strengthen the hearts of your disciples and to glorify the name of Christ among men: whose true Trinity consists in unity, one Divinity remains in the Trinity, equal to the Son, equal to the Holy Spirit.
Who, descending into the womb of the undefiled Virgin, was pleased to take on the form of our servitude and, perfect God, to put on perfect man, so that, made flesh, he might help men and turn unbelievers to the way of truth, incarnate as man.
Who, after the Virgin's birth, placed as a child in a manger, showed the humility of his condition to himself. Who was shown by angels rejoicing to shepherds watching and to the wise men of Ethiopia following a star. Who endured the temptations of the devil and for us the reproaches and other torments, to free us from the snares of visible and invisible enemies, and to cleanse the stains of our sins, he bore the cross's gibbet to restore us to the glory of the heavenly court, which we lost through Adam.
And the Son of Man was incarnate, so that he might make the sons of men sons of God and partakers of heavenly goods. I beseech you, who became the author of our resurrection, to open for us the heavenly entrance, and to captivate the dominion of the devil, and ascending into heaven with your wonderful power to lead our captivity captive.
Who by your death gave life to the dead, and healing to the captive. I humbly invoke you, I mercifully appeal to you, to preserve and defend the Churches of Tournai, as much as I could elevate them with my smallness, and all the dwellings of the saints from every disturbance of demons, to elevate and exalt them.
Guard my small flock present and those to follow, unto the last generation, so that they may know that you are gentle, Father of mercy and compassion, giver of knowledge and truth. To those who pursued me, your unworthy servant, to death with swords and clubs, kindly forgive, and deign to gather me with your saints into your granary.
Also to those, most loving God, who will devoutly honor my memory, grant faith, confer friendship, most merciful God, as your mercy knows how to delight for the Catholic faith, for Christian religion. Indeed, all things are naked and open to your eyes. Behold, now the time of my release approaches.
Eternal God, what shall I do? Send me to follow David saying: As the deer longs for streams of water, so my soul longs for you, God. And again he says: My soul thirsts for the living God: when shall I come and appear before the face of God?
If it can be, allow me to be like Blessed Job, saying: I am compared to the dirt and am like dust and ashes. In you I trust, my God, I seek you, I desire to see you, whom I have always worshipped while on earth. To whom I have devoted myself with all my love. Free me, who are blessed forever and ever.
And soon, again bursting into praises of God, he said: The Catholic faith declares him to be the Son, to whom the Father cries out through the prophet, and says: You are my Son, today I have begotten you. And again: With you is the beginning on the day of your power in the splendors of saints, from the womb before the morning star I have begotten you.
He is Jesus Christ our Lord, equal to the Father, invisible, proceeding from the invisible, eternal from the eternal, immortal from the immortal. Who, uniting the nature of our humanity to himself according to subsistence, endured birth from the same corporeal and virginal womb. Not that he needed that glorious birth necessarily, but to sanctify the first fruits of our substance.
So that even when Christ, united in flesh, proceeded from the Blessed Virgin Mary, that miserable curse, which had been pronounced against all humankind, would cease, and no longer would souls and mortal bodies be destined to death. And to show that what the prophet had foretold with his voice was true: Death is swallowed up in victory. And elsewhere: God has wiped away every tear from every face.
He is Christ, the son of the Virgin Mary, who restored hearing to the deaf, sight to the blind, walked on the sea with dry feet, cast out demons, calmed winds and seas, cleansed lepers, healed paralytics, raised the dead, and said to the unbelieving Jews: If you do not believe my words.
If you don't believe, at least you should believe in the virtues and miracles.
There is one Son of God in Christ, who, just as He is truly the invisible Son of God, so He is truly the visible Christ. For the perfect God took on a perfect human form to provide perfect salvation for humanity.
And let us hear the prophet praying to the Holy Spirit and saying: "Do not take your Holy Spirit from me."
It is indeed a great rashness to separate the Son from the Father, the Father from the Son, or to consider the Holy Spirit as not proceeding from both. For God is inseparable, immutable, and impassible. The Son, as mentioned above, is equal to the Father. The Holy Spirit is neither superior nor better than Him, but equal to the Father, equal to the Son, proceeding from both. Almighty God sent the Holy Spirit into the world to glorify His only begotten Son.
Because Christ, the Son of God, performed human miracles, healed lepers, raised the dead, and did other unheard-of things in the world, and used the power of His own Spirit to demonstrate His divinity, He was said to be glorified by Him. However, it is not appropriate to claim that our Lord Jesus Christ was glorified by the Holy Spirit, as if He had used a power not His own, and had taken power against unclean spirits through the same Spirit. Rather, we should confess that it was His own Spirit through whom He performed such remarkable miracles.
It is also fitting for every believer to affirm that He offered the sacrifice not for Himself, but for the redemption of the human race to the Father, since He, who knew no sin, needed no sacrifice. Therefore, let the Catholic faith believe and affirm that His own life-giving flesh was made from His own Word. For, being naturally life, as God existing, because He is united to His own flesh, He declared it life-giving.
Because He says: "Truly, truly, I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His blood, you will not have eternal life," we should not consider it as the flesh of just any man. According to its own nature, how could the flesh of just one man be life-giving?
Let the unhappy Jew flee. Let the heretic who denies the birth of Christ be destroyed. The faithful praise God as a Trinity in persons, but one God in substance. The miserable expect Him in wrath to be given infernal punishments, whose company the evil angels rejoice in, while the just expect rewards for their labors, whose company the angels of God congratulate, with the help of Him whose benefits are given to the weak, through whom joy is given to the afflicted. To whom be glory, dominion, and power, with the unbegotten Father and the Holy Spirit, for infinite ages of ages. Amen.