Saint Nicetas, Bishop of Aquileia, on the Different Names Applicable to Our Lord Jesus Christ.

Many names and titles are found in the holy Scriptures that are fitting for our Lord Jesus and our Savior. He is called the Word, wisdom, light, power, right hand, arm, angel, and is referred to as a man. He is called a lamb, sheep, priest, way, truth, life. He is called the vine, righteousness, redemption, bread, stone, doctor, fountain of living water, peace, judge, and gate. He is called all these things; and you will find many other names for Christ in the holy Scriptures, since He is the one and the same Son of God, our God, so that the reason for His power and arrangement can be known. You have heard the names; now seek the meanings of the names. He is called the Word, either because He was begotten by God the Father without suffering, or because His generation existed without any loss of the Father's substance. For a man does not seem to suffer any loss when he speaks a word. Or certainly, He is called the Word because through Him, God the Father has always spoken both to angels and to humans. He is called wisdom because through Him, at the beginning, everything was wisely arranged. He is called light because He illuminated the first darkness of the world and dispelled the night of human minds with His coming. He is called power because no creature can overcome Him. He is called the right hand and arm because through Him all things were created, and by Him, all things are held together. He is called the angel of great counsel because He is the messenger of the Father's will. He is called the Son of Man because He was willing to be born as a man for us. He is called a lamb because of His unique innocence. He is called a sheep to demonstrate His passion. He is called a priest either because He offered His own body as an offering and sacrifice to God the Father for us; or because He graciously allows it to be offered by us every day. He is called the way because through Him we progress towards salvation. He is called the vine because, extending the branches of His arms on the cross, He provided a great fruit of sweetness to the world. He is called righteousness because through faith in His name, He justifies sinners.

Redemption is called so because once lost, he redeemed us with the price of his blood. It is called bread because it satisfied the hunger of the nations through his Gospel. It is called a stone because no serpent left a trace on it, and he provided us with protection. He is called a physician because he healed our sicknesses and wounds with his visitation. It is called the fountain of living water because through the washing of regeneration, it both cleanses and gives life to sinners. It is called peace because it gathered those who were divided into one and reconciled them to God the Father. It is called the resurrection because he himself will raise all bodies from the graves. He is called the judge because he is the one who will judge both the living and the dead. It is called the gate because through him, the entrance to the kingdom of heaven is opened to the faithful.
Therefore, because the Lord is called by so many names and titles, have confidence, faithful one, and place your hope in him with all your strength. For to know the Father, he is the word to you. If you want to be wise, seek him because he is wisdom. If your senses suffer from any darkness, seek Christ because he is the light. Are you weak? You have refuge because he is both a physician and strength. Do you want to know through whom the world was created and by whom all things are sustained? Believe in him because he is said to be the arm and the right hand. Do you endure any fear? He will be present for you like an angel in all things. If it is difficult for you to approach the majesty of the only begotten with sight, do not despair because he was also made human so that humanity might have easy access to him. If you are innocent, he will associate himself with you like a lamb. If any persecution by the pagans saddens you, take confidence because he was also sacrificed like a sheep; and he will receive you as a priest to be offered to the Father. If you do not know the way of salvation, seek Christ because he is the path of souls. If you want to know the truth, listen to him because he is the truth. Do not fear death at all because Christ is the life of believers. Does the sweetness of the world delight you? Turn more to the cross of Christ so that you may be refreshed by the sweetness of his vine, which hung on the cross. Are you a lost sinner?

You should hunger for justice and thirst for a redeemer, who is Christ, for he satisfies because he is bread.
If you waver in anything, steady your step in him, because he is a rock, and he will protect you like a wall.
Are you weak and feeble? Seek a remedy from him, because he is a doctor.
Do you suffer from the heat of sins, especially if you are a catechumen? Run to the source of life, so that your heat may be extinguished, and your soul may gain eternity.
If anger torments you and conflict agitates you, go to Christ, because he is peace, so that you may be reconciled with the Father and love every person just as you judge yourself to be loved.
If you fear the fall of the body and dread the death of this life, remember that he is the resurrection; he can raise up what has fallen.
If the pleasure of sin tempts you, and the vices of the flesh provoke you, consider knowingly that he is a just judge, a severe examiner, and the preparer of eternal fire; and you will never delight in sin.
Finally, brother, if any despair about the reward of justice or the expectation of heavenly glory invades you, confidently presume that he is the door; for through him, you will be resurrected from the dead, penetrate the secrets of heaven, and join the company of angels.
And you will hear that desirable voice: "Well done, good and faithful servant, because you were faithful, enter into the joy of your Lord; possess the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world," with him providing, who lives and reigns with the Father and the Holy Spirit for all ages of ages.
Matthew chapter 25, verse 23. Amen.

