Four Books Against Arius
by Marius Victorinus
Book One
In the first discussion of this work, many strong points, and some of them even stronger, were proposed and discussed by you, my dear friend Candidus.
Although they have been refuted as they should have been, we wanted to hear these things from their letters so that by refuting these, we may also overcome those by their refutation.
First, the opinions of Arius and Eusebius need to be defined: where they agree with us, where they differ, and where they seem to contradict themselves.
Arius says that the Son is not unbegotten.
Likewise, Eusebius says that there are not two unbegotten beings.
We also hold this opinion.
Arius says that the Son is not a part of the unbegotten, nor is he from any subject; Eusebius agrees with these two points.
And he adds: nor is the unbegotten divided into two; which means the Son is not a part of the unbegotten.
But Eusebius says: neither a part nor an emanation, he says.
We similarly deny this: for the Son is neither a part of the Father nor an emanation that, by flowing from him, makes him less from where it flowed.
Indeed, we cannot bear the idea of being from a non-subject: not because we say that we are from any subject, but because we are from the Father as the Son.
Arius says the Son exists by the will of God before times and ages.
Eusebius says the same: we say before all ages and before all times; but we say begotten, not made, not created, not founded.
Arius says: the Son is made, namely fully God, the only begotten, unchangeable, who before he was created, did not exist because he is not unbegotten.
Eusebius says the same, adding that the Son is like the one who made everything: we, on the other hand, say not similar, but the same, since he is of the same substance.
Furthermore, Eusebius adds that the origin of the Son cannot be known by man, nor by any higher power or thought, and yet he dares to say that the Son is a creation, existing by the will and decision of the Father, not from anything existing.
This is not to say the origin of the Son: for if he says this, he is from non-existence, he is not of the Father, neither part, nor emanation.
He not only knows the principles but also the reasons of the principles.
If not, what audacity is it to say: This is God, this is Christ: this is the Father, this is the Son?
But we say, the Father as the Father, the Son as the Son.
And first, as he believed he proved in five verses that the Son was made, not born; so we will teach that the Son was first born according to all sacred reading.
Then that same thing, that is, the Son substantially, with the permission of God's spirit, as we can, we will assert.
And from this, the first beginning should be taken.
Paul to the Ephesians, Ephesians 3:14-21:
For this reason, I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named, that He would grant you, according to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened with might through His Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith; that you, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all the saints what is the width and length and depth and height— to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge; that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
Now to Him who is able to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, to Him be glory in Christ Jesus, and in the church, throughout all generations, forever and ever. Amen.
What appears from this is that it is possible to know God and the Son of God: and how the Father, how the Son?
It is also in the Gospel according to John, John 1:18:
No one has seen God at any time. The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He has declared Him.
Therefore, it is possible to speak about God, and thus about the Son.
For who has declared the Father? The Son.
Who is he? He who is in the bosom.
Therefore, the Son not only proceeded but is also always in the bosom, a sufficient teacher about the Father.
What did he declare? How God is.
And the Jews and the heathens have declared before: so what did he declare? That the Father is God, and he himself is the Son, and that he is of the same substance, and that he came from the Father.
For he says, John 8:19: Neither know me, nor my Father.
If you knew me, you would know my Father too. This would never be said unless the Son and the Son substantially:
If you knew me, you would know the Father. For if it were a fiction, the Father would not be known through Him, but the power of God and divinity, as Paul said:  Romans chapter 1, verse 20. For His wonders are known, understood from the creation of the world through the things that have been made: His eternal power and divinity. And the Holy Spirit explained about Christ, as the Savior says in the Gospel according to John chapter 16, verse 16:  The Holy Spirit whom the Father will send in my name, He will teach you all things. If these things are thus, we have learned about both the Father and the Son in the holy scriptures, and from the spirit which a holy man has as his teacher of faith.
So let us speak of the scriptures, and first according to John: for he says, in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Does he speak of another word? Absolutely of the Son.  What then is the Word, if it is not from any subject? How does the Word have power, so that all things are created through Him, He who is from no subject? For it is impossible for the seed of all things that are to be made from nothing. Then if He was in the beginning, how is He the beginning: according to what is the beginning, without a beginning: He who was in the beginning, was always. What then is the audacity? What is the blasphemy? It is not that He was not at any time, as John often says: The Word was in the beginning, was with God, was God the Word Himself? He was in the beginning with God. For although "was" has the significance of past time, frequently without a beginning; but here it must be understood without a beginning, since he said: In the beginning was. Which you also signify before times, before ages saying: All things, he says, were made through Him, and without Him nothing was made that was made. For without the Word what is there, that does not receive its being? For only the Word, as the Word, is both for Himself and for others that which is, He Himself provides for all things that are. And therefore equal indeed to the Father. For the principal cause and for Himself and for others, He is the cause, power, and substance. Being the cause. But the Father is beyond cause. Therefore, the Son differs in that He moves and acts in manifestation, with the great divinity working incomprehensibly for us through the Father. For above blessedness is the Father and therefore rests. For to work also, if it operates imperfection, in the trouble of motion: this is blessedness, as it is to work perfectly.
Therefore, listen to another thing. What is to be, the Father is: what is to work, the Word; and to be is first; second is to work. Indeed, it has itself to be, an inherent operation: for if by motion, this is, by operation, which is life or what intellect is: therefore, it is not only to be, but that which is first to be, because of which it is for Him to rest alone in being: in this way also what is to work, which is second, because not inside, but when it works outside, it is called working. For by the appearance of operation, both is and is named operation, and as the generation of itself, it is both considered and is: thus therefore that which is to work, also has being, but more so does not have: for to work is to be; for both simply and to be and to work, it is the nature of those things that declare what is above and assigned: according to what it is to rest, itself being and substance; but according to what it is to be in motion, action, operation: but this which it is to be in motion, is a declaration of what it is to be according to action. And therefore it was the true light, which enlightens every man coming into the world. Therefore the Word is the true light; and therefore what was made, in Him was life, and the life was the light of men: and the Word Himself, the true light, was in the world, and the world was made through Him; who is the Son of God, of whom it says: No one has ever seen God: the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, He has declared about the Word.
He said and joined everything above about the Son, declaring no other son than the Word. The Word was...
So then, the Son is with God, and in the beginning was, and he himself was God. Through him all things were made, and he is the only-begotten. As proceeding from the Father, he was with the Father because of what it means to work. But because he exists in the bosom of the Father, he has declared about the Father, having become the declaration of the Father according to what it means to work.
What is most important is that the Word itself is the Son. He is the light, he is the life. That the Son is God, John says in the same place: And the Word was God. And again:  John 3:13: No one has ascended into heaven except he who descended from heaven.
That the Son is life, in the same place, 15: So that whoever believes in him may not perish. And again, in the same place: But may have hope, eternal life. That the Son, in the same place, 16: That he gave his only-begotten Son. He said Son, and his, and only-begotten. What more is needed to confirm the true Son?
That he himself is life: So that everyone who believes in him may not perish, but have eternal life. That he himself is the Son, Christ is, in the same place, 17: For God did not send the Son to judge the world, but to save the world. That he is light, about him it says, in the same place, 19: Because light has come into the world.
John was not the true light, and therefore he says, John 1:20: I am not the Christ, but that I am sent. So John was sent. But Christ the Son, John 3:31, who comes from above, is above all. And again: Coming from heaven. It is said indeed that he was sent by God; as, in the same place, 17: For God sent the Son.
But these two things, both coming, and being sent, and the Son in the Father, and the Father in the Son, signify that; because Christ says to the Samaritan woman, John 4:10: You would ask him, and he would give you living water. And again, in the same place, 13, 14: Everyone who drinks of this water will thirst again: but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst forever: but the water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life.
That Christ is the Savior, in the same place, 42: And we know that this is the Savior of the world. That he is the Son of God, John 5:17: My Father is working until now. Who says this? Christ. What blasphemy is it for him to call him Father who is not the Father? What anger of the Jews, in the same place, 18, hearing the Father being God, and getting angry at him, who said that he was the Son of God, when he was not the Son of God. For if he had not been, he would not have said so. But he said, and as a worshiper of God he said; therefore he spoke the truth, and for this reason the unbelief of the Jews is punished.
After these things, every response to the Jews, and declares the Son as Christ, and the Father as God, in the same place, 19-21: What the Father does, I also do: the Son does nothing by himself, unless he sees the Father doing it: for the Father loves the Son: the Father raises the dead, and the Son also raises. In the same place, 26: The Father has life in himself, and the Son has life. And indeed thereafter. That the Word is the Son, and the Son is Christ, in the same place, 38: And you do not have his Word abiding in you, because whom he sent, you do not believe.
That the Son, John 6:32: My Father gives you the true bread from heaven. That Christ is not a man from man, in the same place, 33: For the bread of God is he who comes down from heaven. That he is life: And giving life to the world. And later he says, in the same place, 35: I am the bread of life. That he is from God, in the same place, 46: No one has seen the Father except the one who is from the Father.
That the Father and the Son are in each other, in the same place, 58: Just as the living Father sent me, if the Son is life, the living Father, the Son is in the Father: just as the first is quality, then quality; so the living God first, then life. For the one who begot life, is living: life lives from the living Father. For life does not precede, and so God is living, but God is living first. So life, and so living life. And therefore he then says, in the same place: And I live because of the Father. Therefore the Father is also in him. That he is both bread and life, in the same place: And whoever receives me, he will live because of me, in the same place, 59: This is the bread that comes down from heaven: Not like your fathers ate, and died, whoever eats this bread will live forever.
Do these words come from a man about himself, who is only a man? For if a man says these things, he blasphemes, and John 9:31
Christ says that God listens to him:
Therefore, he is neither a sinner nor just a man.
And it is said in Psalm 107:3: "Vain is the hope in man."
And it says in Psalm 19:8: "But we trust in our God."
Therefore, Christ is God, not from another substance.
John 6:58: "The living Father, and I live because of the Father."
And John 6:35, 48: "I am the bread of life."
John 6:59: "Whoever eats this bread will live forever."
All these signify one substance:
And therefore, Jesus says that he is from above, who says these things.
John 6:63: "What if you see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before?"
That God is spirit is said:
John 4:24: "God is spirit."
And that the Son is the living spirit, that this faith is perfect in Christ, Peter says:
John 6:69, 70: "You have the words of eternal life: and we believe in you, Lord, because you are Christ, the Son of God."
What is the word of eternal life?
Because if anyone listens to you, they will live forever.
That from God:
John 7:29: "I know him because I am from him."
That the substance of the Father is Christ:
John 14:10, 11: "I am in the Father, and the Father is in me."
This is not only through dignity but through substance.
For if it were only through dignity, how does he say:
John 14:28: "My Father is greater than I am: and the Father sends, and the Son is sent?"
Again, dignity is given to the Son by the Father:
According to this, therefore, the Father is in the Son.
Does the Son also give dignity to the Father, who does not have substance?
Therefore, the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father.
But these things, and again, Christ himself, who is the Son of the Father, is also the Holy Spirit:
John 7:37, 38: Jesus stood and cried out: "If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink. Whoever believes in me, as the Scripture has said, rivers of living water will flow from within them."
This was said about the Spirit that those who believed in him were to receive; for the Spirit had not yet been given because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
But again, the rivers of the Spirit, and the belly from which the rivers flow, are Jesus; for Jesus is the Spirit.
Therefore, Jesus is the belly from which the rivers of the Spirit flow.
Just as from the bosom of the Father, and in the bosom the Son, so from the belly of the Son the Spirit;
Therefore, the three are consubstantial; and therefore, in all things, there is one God.
What is not from the world:
John 8:3: "I am the light of the world;"
for because of him the world lives, and will live as long as it obeys him.
That all three are spirits, it is already said:
John 4:24: "God is spirit."
And to some who said:
John 8:19: "Where is your Father?"
he said: "You do not know me or my Father: If you knew me, you would also know my Father."
The Holy Spirit is clearly the Spirit; but all these things are from the Father and from the Father:
therefore, consubstantial.
For not a spirit like others:
for they are from God, not of God:
therefore, these three are consubstantial.
That the Son is true:
John 16:27, 28: "For I came from God, as from the bosom of the Father, and I come into the world."
That before he was in the flesh, he was Christ:
John 8:56, 58: "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it and was glad."
And again: "Before Abraham was, I am."
That he is not just a man:
John 9:5: "While I am in the world, I am the light of the world."
Who gave sight to the blind man? A man? Impossible:
and I, who am the Son of God:
John 9:35-37: "Do you believe in the Son of God?"
He answered: "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?"
Jesus said to him: "You have seen him, and it is he who is speaking with you."
That he is of the same substance and power:
John 10:30: "I and the Father are one."
And again:
John 14:10, 11: "The Father is in me, and I am in him."
Hence it is said in Paul:
Philippians 2:6: "Who, being in the form of God, did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage."
These, therefore, signify that there is one substance and one power.
How then, are the Father and I one? And how is it that the Father is in me, and I am in the Father, if I did not have the substance and power from the Father, being born whole from the whole? And how is it that he did not consider being equal to the Father something to be grasped? For he did not say, "He did not consider being equal," but, "He did not consider it robbery to be equal."
Therefore, he wants to be lesser, not wanting to consider it robbery to be equal. For in these things, considering or not considering it robbery to be equal applies to things that are equal. But we thought it was said that he was equal in terms of power.
First, it is not Arius' doctrine, which says the Father is greater in dignity, power, glory, divinity, and action: for he said they are equal. And if they are equal in this way, it is impossible for them to be equal in this way if they do not have the same substance. For the substance and power, divinity, and action of God are the same: everything is one, and one is simple. This follows: if the Son were from another substance, and especially if from nothing; which substance could receive such divinities and powers? Equality connects to equality, and like to like. Therefore, the Son and the Father are equal, and thus the Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son, and both are one.
But now these things. Let's see those of John. The Savior himself says (John 11:25):  I am the resurrection, for he is life. Who is this? Martha says (John 11:27):  Because you are the Christ, the Son of God, who came into the world. Which is not the son in the same way as us: for we are adopted sons, he is by nature. Christ is also a son by a certain adoption, but according to the flesh (Psalm 2:7):  Today I have begotten you. For if that were the case, he has only a human son: but (John 8:58)  Before Abraham was, I am, saying that he was naturally a son first, he declared. Therefore, the doctrine of Photinus is not true. Then we are not only nations but also the dispersed sons of God. Therefore, Christ is the Son of God; and we are sons: but we by adoption, we through Jesus Christ, we as dispersed sons: is Christ also thus a son? Therefore, Jesus is a son by nature, we are sons by adoption. That he is a son by nature, he himself often says (John 11:41):  Father, I thank you for hearing me. And (John 12:27):  Father, save me from this hour. And again (John 16:28):  I came forth from the mouth of the Father. These things are not said as we say them, but according to the Father, God: For God is not a liar, nor impious, calling himself a son, and God the Father who absolutely did not exist: but because of the body, he induced suffering, so that everything might be fulfilled in mystery. And before he was in the body, Christ was (John 12:28):  And I have glorified, and I will glorify again: for in mystery, he humbled himself in the flesh. Therefore, before and after this, Jesus was glorified. Because of the mystery, he is also introduced as fearing and asking for certain things (John 12:30):  This voice did not come for my sake, but for yours. Similarly, I do these things not for my sake, but for yours.
That the Son of Man himself is Christ, the light in the world is the Son of God (John 12:34, 35):  We have heard from the law that the Christ remains forever: and how do you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is the Son of Man? Jesus said to them:  The light is among you for a little while longer. And then (John 12:36):  While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become sons of light. That he is consubstantial with God (John 14:6, 7):  I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. If you had known me, you would have known my Father also: from now on you do know him and have seen him. And again to Philip (John 14:9, 10):  Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? And again, these and such things, in which it is clear that the Father is as he is, and the Son is as he is, and therefore there are two. But since the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, they are consubstantial. Therefore, it should not be said that there are two persons, one substance; but two, Father and Son, from one substance; the Father giving from his substance to the Son in this in which he begot the Son, and thus both are consubstantial.
Now I am from the Father.
And whatever you ask in my name, I will do it, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
The Paraclete and Christ:
If you love me and keep my commandments, I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Paraclete to be with you forever.
But who is this other Paraclete?
The Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive because it neither sees him nor knows him.
They saw the other Paraclete, that is, Christ, in the flesh, but they did not believe in him.
The power of Christ is the Paraclete:
You know him because he remains with you.
Therefore, Christ gave him to you, for he said: He remains in you, and he is in you.
What does this show?
If God is spirit, and Jesus is spirit, and the Holy Spirit is spirit, then the three are of one substance; therefore, the three are of the same essence.
The Holy Spirit is from Christ, just as Christ is from God, and thus the three are one.
I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you.
And again he says:
On that day, you will know that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you.
This is according to the spirit:
The Paraclete from the Son:
But the Paraclete, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things that I have said to you.
It is clear from this that God is in Christ, and Christ is in the Holy Spirit.
The first Paraclete is Christ, and the Holy Spirit is the Paraclete.
Then Christ sent God:
What Christ spoke, the Holy Spirit speaks.
But Christ spoke in parables and performed signs:
Therefore, all things were hidden because he was in the flesh; just as he was inwardly, so too the truth was inwardly in parables and signs.
But the Holy Spirit teaches all things:
For the Holy Spirit speaks to the spirit of humans; he speaks directly, without any figure:
And therefore, he will teach you.
And what will he speak?
Whatever I have said, Christ said.
I have said refers to the future.
What future?
Not the present, but after ascending to the Father.
And if this Paraclete comes from God in the name of Christ, he teaches what Jesus says:
Therefore, is he Jesus himself, or another Jesus?
Or is Jesus in the other Paraclete, that is, the Holy Spirit, as God is in him?
In this sequence, the three exist, and the three are one, and of one essence:
As Christ says:
I go and come to you:
Another Paraclete will be given to you by God, who has everything from me, and whatever the Father has, he has given to me.
Indeed, the whole mystery is this:
The Father working operation, the Son working operation, that is, regeneration:
And the Holy Spirit working operation is what regeneration is.
But these things are also said elsewhere:
That the Word, that is, Jesus or Christ, is equal to the Father, and also inferior:
I go to the Father, for the Father is greater than I.
Paul also says:
He did not consider equality with God something to be grasped.
And it is said:
I and the Father are one.
And both the Father and the Son work:
And he would not have said, the Father is greater than I, unless he was equal:
It also follows, if the whole is from the whole, and light from light, and if all that the Father has given to the Son:
And all things are substance, power, and dignity, equal to the Father, but the Father is greater:
Because he gave everything to the Son, and is the cause of the Son's existence, that he might be in this way.
To this, the Father is greater because he is action without activity:
More blessed because without trouble, impassible, and the source of all things, resting, perfect in himself, needing nothing:
But the Son received to be, and in that which is to act, proceeding from action, coming to perfection, becoming fullness by motion.
But because in him, and through him, and by him all things are generated; always full, and always a receptacle, by which reason he is both impassible and passible.
Therefore, equal and unequal:
Thus, the Father is greater.
The Paraclete is from God and from Christ:
When the Paraclete comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father.
The double power of the Word towards God:
Christ in the flesh: the other in secret, the Holy Spirit.
Therefore, when the Word was present, that is, Christ, the Word could not come in secret, that is, the Holy Spirit.
(John 16:7): For if I do not go away, the Advocate will not come to you.
So, these two are from one another, the Holy Spirit from the Son, just as the Son is rationally from God, and the Holy Spirit is from the Father.
All three are one, the Father not silent in silence, but a voice in silence, the Son now a voice; the Advocate the voice of the voice.
(John 16:13-14): When the Spirit of truth comes, He will guide you into all the truth: He will not speak on His own authority: Christ is the truth: but whatever He hears, He will speak, and He will declare to you the things that are to come.
He will glorify me, for He will take what is mine and declare it to you.
Then He adds (John 16:15): All that the Father has is mine.
So He says: He will take what is mine, which is one action, that is, Christ is the acting, and the Holy Spirit: and the first thing is to live, and from Him comes understanding: Christ is to live, understanding is the Spirit: therefore the Spirit takes from Christ, Christ Himself from the Father, and thus the Spirit also from the Father.
Therefore, all things are one, but from the Father.
That Christ also proceeded from the Father, that is, that God sent Him, that is, proceeded from God, as He says (John 16:27-28): For I proceeded from God: I proceeded from the Father:
It should be known that He also said: and I came forth.
But that He put first from God, I proceeded from God: which means, that God sent Him.
Believe this first, therefore, because I came forth from God.
And from God, and as who?
From that God who is my Father: Therefore, I came forth from the Father, and came into the world.
The natural order of this speech is this: I proceeded from the Father, came forth from God, and came into the world.
But the order of effect and speech from men: because you loved me and believed, that I came forth from God; for this is first in faith.
Then I proceeded from the Father, explaining from the higher what was said, from which they also say (John 16:30): We believe that you came forth from the Father.
What then did He leave out about God and the Father?
For He does not say (John 8:16), I am not alone; because the Father is with me; and it is not to be understood that the Father suffered: for not He, but His human form.
What comes in the resurrection of the flesh? (John 17:1-2) Glorify the Son, that the Son may glorify you as you have given him authority over all flesh, to give eternal life to all you have given him.
Therefore, not only the man Christ, but God in the man.
This is to have life, to believe in the Lord and in His Son (John 17:3): And this is eternal life, that they know you the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent.
Who was before the world (John 17:5): And now, Father, glorify me in your own presence with the glory that I had with you before the world existed.
That men are from God, but not from God (John 17:6-7): I have manifested your name to the men whom you gave me.
From this it is clear that not all were yours, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word:
Now they know that everything you have given me is from you.
And what a marvel, if men are from God, if also the flesh, which He Himself formed?
What then? Is Christ like this? By no means.
This whole passage sets forth that men are from God, but not all.
Again, and this, that Christ was before the foundation of the world, that the Father has given all things to the Son, if also He gave the name, as He says (John 17:12): I kept them in your name, which you have given me.
Therefore, we have that Christ has the name of the Father, and that He is life, and has the power to give life.
That He is life, and the Father is life, as it is said (John 6:58): The living Father sent me.
And this is the substance of God and Christ, therefore consubstantial.
Then it is said that Christ is light, and God is true light: these are for understanding: is the Holy Spirit something else?
No.
Then that light, not substance: so therefore consubstantial.
And everything that God has, the Son has, therefore consubstantial.
But about this later.
That He was born (John 18:11): For this I was born, and for this I have come into the world, to reign.
That from Christ the Spirit.
Holy (John 20:21): Christ breathed on them and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit." All of this according to the Gospel of John.
Let us also look at a few points according to Matthew; for I pass over similar things.
Even Satan admits that Christ is the Son of God, for he says (Matthew 4:3, 6): "If you are the Son of God."
And this he says three times: But in the second he confessed about the Son of God and tempted, if he were Christ, for he says: "If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down. For it is written: He will command his angels concerning you."
He confesses; the one who says, "concerning you," confesses the Son of God, and thus he confesses him.
Then the demons confess again (Luke 4:41): "Many demons also came out, shouting and saying: 'You are the Son of God.'"
Listen, Arius, listen, Eusebius, and all of you listen, Arians, especially those who say that Christ is from him who is: but according to the serpent’s understanding: because the Father is the one who made Christ: Therefore, saying that the Son is from him who is.
So listen, Satan calls him the Son of God, to whom he promised the kingdom of the world, knowing all things that are in the heavens: for he is from there.
Why then, after the third temptation, did the devil depart, having confessed that he is the Son of God?
What the demons also said, that he is the Son of God (Mark 1:24): "What have you to do with us, Son of God? Have you come?"
Which one should not doubt about Christ (Matthew 11:6): "Blessed is the one who does not take offense at me."
That the Son has everything from the Father (Matthew 11:27): "All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father, nor does anyone know the Father except the Son, and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him."
Why then, does only the Son know the Father, or the Father know the Son? Except that no one has his substance. For all things that are in glory, and in divinity, in power, in their very action and knowledge of the Father, and worship him.
But because to know, this is to know the very nature of God, this is, to have his substance: therefore no one knows God, except the Son having the same substance, and having it from him. Otherwise, no one could see, as it is said (John 1:18): "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has made him known."
What does it mean to be God? For in the bosom, and in the womb of the substance, consubstantial, both, and consisting in substance and divinity, both in each other, and each knows the other.
So, what do you say, Valentine? The first age proceeded, and wanting to see the Father, could not.
To be in the bosom of the Father, and always to be, says John of the Son. Therefore, not only does he see the Father, but he is also always in the Father.
What is a great sin against the Holy Spirit to say (Matthew 12:31, 32): "Every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men. And whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him: but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, either in this age or in the age to come."
First to consider, that the Holy Spirit is of God. For he said (Matthew 12:28): "In the Spirit of God, I cast out demons."
Then about the blasphemy and sin that the Jews committed, as he said, what it is like against the Holy Spirit. First, that blasphemy and sin against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven anyone.
It is a sin, to speak blasphemously with intent. But this is not enough. He said further: even if someone unwillingly speaks any kind of word, which is not a sin, it will not be forgiven him in any age.
So if the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of God, and the Holy Spirit has all things from the Son of God; one substance in three from the substance of the Father, consubstantial: therefore three, that is, together in essence.
If the Father’s substance is Spirit; and the Son, Spirit, and the Holy Spirit, is the Spirit of the Father, in what order is the Holy Spirit placed? For he precedes, if he is the Spirit of the Father; and follows, if he has what he is from the Son.
And again the Son, as much as he is Spirit, is one with the Father, and the Father is in the Son, and all existing in each other: therefore, they are consubstantial, having one and the same substance, and always together consubstantial with a divine affection, having their own subsistent action.
But these things are again sufficient for us who...
They are spoken in the Gospels. Christ, the Son of God and the Savior, says in Matthew chapter 22, verses 43 and 46:
"How do they say that Christ is the son of David, and David himself says in the book of Psalms, 'The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand?' So David calls him Lord, and how is he his son?"
This shows that Christ existed even before he came in the flesh, that he is the Spirit of God, and that he is God.
Let's also look at the Apostle, for he says about Christ to the Romans:
"Because Christ is God, on the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God."
Without a doubt, this is about Christ: for he will judge. Because with God, that which does not exist is nothing.
Paul introduces an example from Genesis chapter 4, verse 17:
"Because I have made you the father of many nations before him whom you believed, God, who gives life to the dead, and calls those things which do not exist as though they did."
Because the Spirit of God is the Spirit of Christ, and the same is the Holy Spirit.
As written in Romans chapter 8, verse 9:
"But you are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he does not belong to him."
The power of the whole mystery is in baptism, its potency in receiving the spirit.
If this is so, it was said: you are in the spirit: whom the Holy Spirit gave you.
Who is this Spirit, he added: If indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you.
Who is this?
If anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ.
Therefore, the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Christ are the same.
In this, it must be understood that the Spirit of Christ is the same as Christ himself.
It follows, as written in Romans chapter 8, verse 10:
"But if Christ is in you."
Therefore, the Spirit of God is God.
One substance, because it is the same spirit: but in three,  (homoousion) therefore.
Hence, not a similar substance, because it is the same spirit: and yet, for this reason, the same passions are not in the Father, because it is one spirit: in two only as passions, because the spirits have already progressed.
But these things will be explained more fully later, as written in Romans chapter 11, verse 36:
"Because from him, and through him, and in him are all things. From him: it is said, as from the Father. Through him: as from Christ. In him, as from the Holy Spirit."
Elsewhere he says: In him, through him, to him.
That God is Christ, as written in Romans chapter 9, verse 5:
"From whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed forever."
To the Corinthians first, as written in First Corinthians chapter 2, verse 8:
"If they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of majesty."
That Christ, just as God, is incomprehensible, or barely comprehensible, but as it is said in First Corinthians chapter 2, verse 9:
"What no eye has seen, what no ear has heard, and what has not entered into the heart of man, what God has prepared for those who love him."
Then he says, what he understands, as in First Corinthians chapter 2, verse 11:
"As the spirit of man understands what is in man, so the Spirit of God understands what is in God."
If he says these things about Christ, it appears that it is not easy to know the generation of the Son.
For neither does the mind perceive the Son of God, nor can it know the manner of generation.
If it is about his presence, this too is beyond sight, beyond hearing, beyond mind.
If, however, as some understand, he says these things about what God has prepared for those who love him: the generation is much more wonderful, and barely comprehensible.
If these things are without understanding, what can you say from these, from those which are not, that Christ is or is of similar substance?
Things that are comprehensible and defined.
But to be  (homoousion) is not only incomprehensible, and it has many contradictions.
For if  (homoousios) and he is unbegotten: if  (homoousios) how is he another, how is the Father one, the Son another?
If  (homoousios), how has one suffered, the other not?
From this come the Patripassians.
But because by the will of God all things are sought, and those of God, the Spirit who dwells in us, the manner of divine generation will be found, according to which  (homoousios) will be manifested, and those things will be exterminated, as written in First Corinthians chapter 2, verse 12:
"For we have not received the spirit of the world, but of God."
That the same spirit is God and Christ and the Holy Spirit, and the same one spirit, as written in First Corinthians chapter 12, verses 3 to 6:
"Therefore, I make known to you, that no one speaking by the Spirit of God says, 'Jesus is accursed.' And no one can say, 'Jesus is Lord,' except by the Holy Spirit."
It is not possible to declare Jesus as Lord except by the Holy Spirit.
There are different kinds of gifts, but the same Spirit distributes them.
There are different kinds of service, but the same Lord.
There are different kinds of working, but in all of them and in everyone it is the same God at work.
Therefore, if no one says "Anathema Jesus" in the Spirit, it is the Spirit and God and the Holy Spirit.
About this, it says: And no one can declare Jesus as Lord except by the Holy Spirit.
Furthermore, it says that the different kinds of gifts come from the Spirit, from God indeed are the graces, but the divisions are from the Spirit.
For different actions exist from the Holy Spirit, in essence being of the same substance, because the Holy Spirit is like the ministry of the Lord.
Indeed, He divides the ministries in the operation of life, and in His essence according to the operation of life.
In essence, He is of the same substance.
The Spirit and operations are from God.
There are many operations, but in all of them, it is the same God.
However, God differentiates because He makes the divisions of operations, yet He works in all things.
Being the cause of operations, He makes the divisions of operations, and He is God according to the essence of the Spirit, being of the same substance as the action.
Thus, all three in action and essence are of the same substance.
All three are the Spirit, and the Spirit is from the Father: the substance is from the Father.
That Christ is life, and that the Spirit, it is said in John 16:63: The Spirit gives life.
And again, it says in Second Corinthians 3:17: The Lord is the Spirit.
That Christ is from God, not from things that do not exist (Second Corinthians 4:4): So that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine on them.
If Christ is the image of God, then Christ is from God.
For an image is an image.
The image indeed is God; therefore, Christ is the image.
But an image is an image, and what is an image is principal.
The image is secondary, and something different in essence from what is depicted.
But we do not understand the image as in sensible things.
Here, we do not understand the substance of the image: it is a shadow in the air or in water through a certain corporeal light of corporeal effluence by reflection, it is a figure, it is nothing in itself, nor has its own motion, being only the substance of the image, having neither body, nor sense, nor intelligence.
If that in which it is formed is removed or disturbed, it is absolutely nothing and nowhere.
Therefore, we say Christ is the image of God in another way, first being, and being by Himself; and that He is an intelligent being; and we call Him a living image, and life-giving, and the seed of all that is.
For the Word by which all things were made, and without Him, nothing.
But all these things are also attributed to God; therefore, God and the Word are of the same substance.
And why is the Word the image of God? Because God is hidden, in potential indeed; but the Word is manifest: the action indeed; which action having all that is in potential, life, and knowledge according to motion, produces and manifests all things.
For this reason, all things that are in potential, the image is action, perfecting the species of each of those in potential, and existing by itself, for from nothing no substance: every being has an inseparable species; moreover, the species itself is the substance.
Not that the species is prior to being, but that the species makes being definite, that which is being species.
Indeed, being is the cause of the species being in that which is being.
And therefore, being is the Father.
The species is the Son.
Again, that being itself bestows the species itself being: the being of the species is the image of that which is being.
This is according to cause: the first being is of the same substance, therefore being of the two, and according to being, the image is of the first being without time: the first and second I say according to cause.
One is to the other as the Father and the Son.
But not reversely cause, thus the Father is Father, and the Son is Son.
In that which is being, both are together, and always both, of the same substance according to being, but according to potential and action, potential is the Father, action the Son.
Thus, the Son is born, having in action and potentially.
To be, as it is potentially being, has its own action of being in itself, which is potentially being. However, it has, according to understanding, not as it has, but as it is.
For all things there are simple. But I said according to the Gospel of John, “Whatever the Father has, the Son has the same.” According to this reasoning, the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father, and both are of the same substance. The Son is the image of the Father, for the being of the two is of the same substance. However, one is different from the other; one is the image, and the other is the image-bearer.
Again, one is different from the other; one is unbegotten, the other is begotten. But these are timeless, for they are from the beginning and from eternity to eternity. Therefore, neither those who call Christ a mere man, nor those who say He is from nothing, nor those who say He is from some time, nor others of this kind have a place in this understanding.
Let us also consider this. Moses says the word of God in Genesis, “Let us make man in our image and likeness.” God says this, let us make: He says this to a co-worker, necessarily to Christ, and He says in our image. Therefore, man is not the image of God, but according to the image, for only Jesus is the image of God, while man is according to the image, that is, the image of the image. But He says in our image. Therefore, both the Father and the Son are one image.
If the Son is the image of the Father, and the Father is the image itself, then both are of the same substance. For the image is substance; it is one and simple, both being and acting there: thus they are both substance and form. But as substance is the image, the Father and the Son are of the same substance, with the Father existing as being and as acting. The Son, however, exists as acting, also as being, each having what it is, according to what is most fundamental, with being existing first, before acting. But the Father is being, and most fundamentally the Father is being itself, which also has action potentially.
Again, as the younger being, the Son is acting, as the younger from being, having the Son in acting from the first being. Therefore, one is the Father as being, one is the Son as acting, both existing together in each other, as demonstrated. Therefore they are of the same substance.
Let us therefore say: “Let us make man in our image and in our likeness.” What is it? And what is in our likeness? Then what is this; and in the likeness? For thus it is said, it signifies the difference between image and likeness. Although there is much question about what He said: “Let us make man in our image,” it must now be conceded that it is about the soul of man, whether about both soul and body, or about the soul alone, nothing else is understood except about the soul: for it alone is in the image of God, and in the likeness.
We say that Christ is the image of God, but He is the Word. Therefore, we say the soul is in the image of God, calling it rational. For the Word is not the soul, but rational: and that all life is Christ, but the soul lives, which life has substance. Therefore, the soul is in the image of God, but Christ is of God. What then do we understand by this, in the likeness?
As the Word is substance, as has been declared: for the Word is being itself, and being itself; the Word is acting, and is motion being, and as it is simple there, all this is being and acting, which is being there, which is substance. So also the soul, as it is the soul, this is being and substance; but that which moves itself is the image of substance: rather, it is itself substance according to the form of substance, and therefore in the definition of the soul when we say, what is the soul? We properly and substantially say that it moves itself.
It is clear also from this, that the substantial image, rather, the substance is the soul, which moves itself. But this is rational according to the image of the Word being rational. Therefore, being according to the image is one thing, which indeed is substantial; but being according to the likeness is another thing, which is not substance, but a declarative quality in substance. But as we accept God, so also the image, that is, Christ as substance. However, we accept perfection according to the quality as significant.
We choose. And if it means something similar, necessarily, how do we say that the soul is rational and perfectly rational according to the likeness of perfection in God? We say the soul is perfect, according to the image, thus now and in the world; but according to the likeness later through faith in God and in Jesus Christ, how it would have been if Adam had not sinned.
Therefore, in what it is rational, it is according to the image; in what it will be perfect, it is according to the likeness. So, it is one thing to be an image, and another to be according to the image, and even more to be according to the likeness.
What, then, is the blasphemy, to say that the Father and the Son are of the same substance: when the Son is an image according to substance, not according to likeness? But now, this is so.
Let us move on to other things. What is in Christ is a creature, but not one. For there are three creatures: one indeed when all things were created through Christ; the second is our creation in Christ through baptism, but in Christ, and another transformation happens in Christ.
Thus, 2 Corinthians 5:17: "If anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation," it is said: Before Christ was in the flesh, 2 Corinthians 5:21: "He who knew no sin became sin for us." What was the time when he did not know sin? Before he was in the flesh, to the Ephesians.
Before Christ was in the flesh Ephesians 1:3-4: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, just as He chose us before the foundation of the world."
What was Christ before he was in the flesh? Ephesians 2:12: "At that time you were without Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel." What God is Christ? Ephesians 2:12: "Having no hope, and without God." This means, without Christ.
What spirit is it that binds everything? Ephesians 4:3-6: "Eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. One body, and one Spirit. One Lord, one faith, one baptism. One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in all."
To the Galatians, that Christ is God Galatians 1:1: "Paul, an apostle, not from men nor through man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father." And again Galatians 1:11-12: "The gospel that was preached by me is not according to man; for I neither received it from man, nor was I taught it, but it came through the revelation of Jesus Christ."
To the Philippians, that Christ is Spirit Philippians 1:19: "And in the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ." That homoousios, and the Son is with the Father Philippians 2:5-7: "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ, who, being in the form of God, did not consider it robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, taking the form of a servant, and coming in the likeness of men, and being found in appearance as a man."
The first of Photinus, and from him, and before him, those who say that Jesus was a man and made only by man, recognize the impious blasphemy in Christ, who, being in the form of God. When was he existing? Before he came into the body: for he said, that he emptied himself and took the form of a servant: therefore he was before he became a man. And what was he like? The Word of God, the form of God.
What does it mean, being equal with God? It means his very own essence and power: for he said he was equal. Indeed, equality is a declaration of both magnitude and quantity: the magnitude of the essence is the magnitude of the mass, for quality has no magnitude, nor does essence have what it is to be. But only as much as essence is, it is of magnitude. And therefore, the blessed Paul, declaring the essence of God, says all these quantities Ephesians 3:18: "That you may comprehend the height, depth, length, and breadth of God."
Accordingly, Christ exists equal to God. For he did not say similar to God, which does not signify essence, but another thing in essence, according to likeness by accident, just as according to likeness, man is to God, although the essence of God is different from the essence of man. From this, it is blasphemous to say that man is equal to God. Therefore, if Christ is the form of God, and form is essence, for form and image are the same: the Word is the form and image of God.
The Word was always with God. The Word was of the same substance with God, with whom the Word was both in the beginning and always. Being the image and substance, and at the same time being of the same substance, which is called "of the same substance," is evident from this. For the Apostle said: He emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant. Did He take only the form of a man and not the substance of a man? For He clothed Himself in flesh, was in the flesh, and suffered in the flesh, and this is the mystery, and this is what is for our salvation.
Therefore, if He emptied Himself, and Christ emptied Himself, and before He was in the flesh, He was Christ. And if He existed before that, since He emptied Himself, He clothed Himself in flesh. Why did He empty Himself, if, as you say, O Marcellus, or Photinus, He took a man as if it were a fourth? It was necessary for the Word, who was to remain, to take a man and somehow inspire the spirit into actions. But He said, He emptied Himself. Correctly: He who had to clothe Himself in a man.
What then does "He emptied Himself" mean? That the universal Word was not universal in being the Word, flesh, and became flesh. Therefore, He did not take a man, but became a man. Thus, the form is substance, with the substance in which the form is, of the same substance with the principal substance, and potentially prior, which grants this form to be, and to be in substance, and always to be together: for without one, the other is not. Therefore, the form from the substance, the substance is the form of the substance, this is the Son of God. The form is substance, and always the substance with the form, always the Father, always the Son with the Father, this is the Word with God, this is always.
But since this form is substance, which is the image and is the Word, whom we call the Son of God, as the Word is of all things that exist, He is the Word. The universal Word is the Son of God, by whose power all things come forth and proceed into generation and consist. Therefore, His power, proceeding and existing together with the Father, makes all things and generates, and this power in that it is prior to Him, which indeed is called action, suffers if anything suffers, according to the materials and substances to which it grants their own being, the universal Word, which always is with the Father, and of the same substance, being immutable and impassible.
And therefore, it is said of the Son that He is impassible and passible, but in progress, suffering, especially at the end of the progression, that is, when He was in the flesh: for those sufferings are not said, being generation from the Father, the first motion, and being the creator of all things: for those things, being substantial, are more substantial: for the words of beings are according to the power of the substance itself: therefore, they are not sufferings.
But these things. And again, what do the Photinians say? If the Son is of the same substance with the Father, how did God have a Son born of a man from Mary? And what do the Arians say? If the Son is of the same substance and the Word, and the substance is together with the Father? For it is blasphemy to say this: There was a time when He was not. And this blasphemy: of those things that are not to be. And again, those who say that the Son is of the same substance with the Father are impious.
For substance, according to what it is, is not different, so as to be similar to another: for it is the same in two, and it is not similar, but the same. But when it is different, it is not said to be similar because it is substance, but according to a certain quality. Therefore, it is impossible and inappropriate for something to be of the same substance. Furthermore, similarity which is in difference is either in the same substance divided into two parts, or in another: for what is receptive of being dissimilar, this is receptive of being similar: but substance, according to what it is, does not receive being similar or dissimilar: but according to what it is receptive, it is said to be similar or dissimilar by quality, with the substance remaining in its power or existence, either the same or different.
But what is that substance of God or of the Word, is it receptive of dissimilarity, so that it is said to be similar? But it is impossible, and not similar, therefore, not of the same substance. Let us see this also: if similar...
There are substances in the same category, like that of a human or an animal: for a man is similar to another man, and an animal to another animal. Or substances in different categories, like a stone to a man, or a statue to a horse. So, how do they say these two are of the same essence?
If they belong to the same category, like in animals, substance comes first: but if in the same substance, either divided or born from a higher substance; each is either subordinate, and one is subject, but divided, neither equally nor unequally, one is perfect, but two perfect, and from perfect comes perfect. Therefore, not in the same similarity, indeed and similarity: if this, then it must be in another category.
Whence then, is it something else? Therefore from nothing: or two principles, but none of these, since there is one principle and the cause of all things that exist. The Father according to the Word, who was in the beginning, and therefore always was: therefore not from nothing. If indeed this is so, neither does it mean that another kind or similarity.
But how does he say that Jesus did not consider himself equal to God, but that he did not consider equality to be robbery? For things that are naturally equal, not by their own divinity, but those made equal by fortune are considered as robbery equal. Therefore, with great confidence, and truly natural divinity to be equal, not to consider robbery to be equal to God.
But these things. And again, what does he say to the Colossians: that Jesus is before all things. For his generation is twofold: one indeed in divinity and sonship, hidden, divine, and understood by faith: the other, however, in coming into flesh, and bearing flesh. That indeed is the sole generation from God, a manifestation of power: but this is more about the reception of flesh, not generation. Therefore, if he is prior, he is not the Savior from man: if it is generation, it is not a fabrication: but if the generation is from God, it is not from nothing: if Jesus is the image of God, he is of the same essence: for an image, substance with substance, whose image it is and in whom it exists. And that the image is substance, from the substance in which it is or subsists generated, in the declaration of the inner power: hence the Father who is within, hence the Son who is outside. Again, that the Son is the Word, is a substance hastening into action, for the Word is life, and the Word is intelligence, proceeded into the substance of those things that are intelligible, and material, and therefore the action of the Word itself, because of the weakness of those perceiving it, is passible, or rather is said to be passible:
For blessed Paul says of Christ: He has delivered us from the power of darkness, and transferred us to the kingdom of the Son of his love; in whom we have redemption and forgiveness of sins: who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation. For in him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created through him and for him, and he is before all things, and in him all things hold together: he is the head of the body, the church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that in all things he might be preeminent: for in him all the fullness was pleased to dwell and through him to reconcile all things to himself, making peace by the blood of his cross, whether things on earth or things in heaven.
The whole mystery is said in this exposition, that of the same essence, is said of the one who is the image of the invisible God, that the Son is the firstborn, that he was not created before all creation; for if he himself was created, he would not say, before all creation: and properly he said the firstborn which is of the Son. Let us therefore join the meaning: firstborn before all creation. Therefore he is begotten as a son; that creation, as what is created: not that he generated another afterwards, but that before all creation he is the firstborn. But all creation is both of those in heaven, and of those on earth, visible and invisible. Therefore the Son is without creation; by nature and generation he is a son. That Christ is the Word, and
Because the Word is the cause of everything that exists, making them exist; and therefore it is said that in Him all things were created and through Him were created. For the Word is both the cause and the means of being for those things that exist, and it is the receptacle of those things that exist in Him. And because all things exist in Him, He is the receptacle filled with all things that exist, and He Himself is the fullness. Therefore, as it is written in Romans 11:36, all things are through Him, and all things are in Him, and all things exist in Him.
So if the Son came from nothing, how can these things be? Without faith, therefore, it is impossible for such things to be. And again, if He is not of the same substance (homoousios), how can both the Father and the Son be the fullness? For together they are the fullness of all things. And is the fullness of the same substance like the soul and other things that were created? Absolutely impossible.
For indeed, being of the same substance (homoousios) is such that it is spoken of in difference. For another similar substance cannot be said unless it is in itself. But if another substance is, and all things that exist have their being from it, it is impossible for one to be everything. But now the Father and the Son, being of the same substance (homoousios), through the Word, because through the Word all things are called into one, and all things are from God, and God is all in all, with the Father remaining impassible, as it has been shown.
But that Jesus is the Word, who is also the life-giving spirit of all things that exist, the source of eternal life, coming in the flesh according to the mystery, and he conquered death in the death of sins, and raised the dead to eternal life. But that God is the power of the source of eternal life, and therefore the Son is the Word, the source of eternal life, existing as the power of the Father, the firstborn from the dead, and therefore all things turned to Him will become one, that is, spiritual. Therefore, the Son of God is of the same substance (homoousios), which is the source of eternal life, just as the Father is His power, and because through the Son all things will become one, for through Him all things exist.
That Jesus, that is the Word and the seed, and as the element of all things that exist, especially now in the operation and manifestation of those things that exist, because in Him dwells all the fullness of the divinity bodily (Colossians 2:9), that is in substance in operation. For in the Father all things dwell potentially. And therefore Jesus, the Word, is the image of God the Father, this itself is power, now what is action. For everything that comes into action, and is the image of that which is potential, and that which is potential the Son is what is in action, from these the Son and the Father are of the same substance (homoousios).
That from Jesus all things, and therefore from God all things, I say all things whatsoever exist, and not holding the head of Christ, from whom the whole body is supplied and joined together by joints and bands, grows with the growth of God (Colossians 2:19). For all things are one, even if they are different, that exist. For the body of the whole universe is not like a heap, which heap by mere contact of the grains makes a body, but most importantly by alternating parts into one another, as a chain containing the body is. For the chain is God, Jesus the Spirit, mind the soul of angels and then all bodily things supplied. Therefore, the fullness is indeed produced.
So if all things are one, indeed in substance, much more so God and the Son, not only unsubstantial, but consubstantial. For all beings are unsubstantial in Jesus, that is, in the Word as it is said: All things were created in Him (Colossians 1:16). But these are not of the same substance (homoousios). For that first being which is God is not as if it were substance, nor is the image which is the Son as substance, but only these together, which is the being of divinity to the cause, is being to those things that exist. Therefore, only God the Word is of the same substance (homoousios).
To Timothy first: For indeed, with confidence, it is a great mystery of godliness, which was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen by angels, preached among the nations, believed on in the world, received up in glory (1 Timothy 3:16). This is not about the first generation but the second. For this is the great mystery, that God emptied Himself when He was in the form of God; then that He suffered, first being in the flesh, and having the fate of human generation, and being lifted up on the cross.
These wonders would not occur if they were merely from man, or from nothing, or from God according to creation.
What was emptied, if it did not exist before it was in the flesh? And what was equal to God? How could it be equal if it was created from nothing?
Therefore, the great mystery is that it was manifested in the flesh.
So it existed before it was in the flesh but was manifested in the flesh: it existed intellectually and intelligibly; but then it was manifested sensibly and incarnationally.
The power of the Word, according to its own substance, is life, always substance, as life, and it gives life and revives, and does not allow whatever it gives life to remain in death.
In the first motion, it brought all things into life, and this is the descent of the Word, which, coming from the Father, gave its own life to those in the heavens, the Angels, thrones, glories, and similar beings, by the power of the Father: for the Word is of all, by whom all things were made.
And again, it could not give life unless there was material to give life to, so the material of dead nature was made, which, being given life, sent out its armies by divine vivification, and corrupted man, but the Word, perfect life, completed the mystery and appeared in the material, that is, in the flesh and in darkness.
For how could it appear as it was unless it appeared in the flesh, that is, in sense?
Therefore, the Word made all things, and in all things, and begot all, saved, and reigned, existing as eternal life in the spirit: Therefore it was justified, appeared to Angels, and coming, was preached to the nations.
It existed before it came: was believed in the world, as Isaiah also confessed prophesying: Egypt labored, and the merchandise of Ethiopia and Saba: Tall men will walk in you, and they will be your servants, and they will follow you bound in chains, and they will worship you and pray to you, saying, 'God is in you, and there is no other God besides you: for you are God, and we did not know, the God of Israel' (Isaiah 45:14).
Therefore preached in the world, received in the glory of divinity from the beginning, and in the beginning, and afterwards, and always from eternity, and forever and ever. Amen.
See also this concerning the consubstantiality, how the spirit says to Isaiah: 'God is in you, and there is no other God besides you': what it says to the Son, our Lord, 'God is in you', that is, what was said: 'the Father is in me'.
But another thing, 'and there is no other God besides you': in this word, it predicts all heresies.
What do all the Jews say about this? And those who say Jesus is a man? And those who say He was created out of nothing? And there was a time when He was not?
For He was God and always one God. If Jesus is the Word and the Word is always with God; and the Word is one God; and there is no other, therefore, God is consubstantial.
And if the Word is again God, this is being, and of this God, and of this being, the power and wisdom is Jesus, that is the Word, one God, and there is no other.
Therefore, the unity of the Word and God, and that which is being, and the Word being, the same together in that which is being subsisting, and therefore consubstantial.
But that the Word is being, this is to be life and intellect: for these are the power and wisdom of God, which is the Savior Jesus, progress and generation, and in substance the procession of sonship, and in action the shining forth and reflection.
But this was not when it was not, but always was: therefore always the Father, always the Son.
And the Father only the Father, and the Son only the Son: but to the Father, because what is being, which is God and Father, is the cause to the Word of what it is to be, nor is it the other way around: and it is proper for Him, who is the first being, to rest; but for the Word it is proper to move and act, and not to move locally, nor by translation into a place, but by a motion which is better and more divine, which by its own motion gives life and produces intellects subsisting in itself, and not divided from its own power in operation.
But these things.
And again: There are also other things in the sacred Scripture, that God is Jesus, that before the ages: that the Son, and by nature the Son, and in the flesh the Son, and...
Especially in the flesh, he was called the Son, because at that time he saved all beings, and then he conquered the enmities of divinity, and all death, and because he himself suffered according to motion: but the Father did not suffer according to cessation. If these things are so, this alone is lacking: how to understand "homoousion," or that the Son is "homoousion" with the Father. For this doctrine has now been awakened, and indeed long ago it was rumored that it should not be said "homoousion," but rather "homoiousion": now this doctrine has been found. They even dare to say this, that long ago, I do not say how long ago. It is enough for me that it was not given from eternity, nor from the presence of Jesus, but long ago, a hundred years ago, I concede, and more.
Where was it hidden? Where did it sleep before eleven years ago, when in the city of Nicaea, faith was confirmed by more than 300 bishops, excluding the Arians, in which council these men were the lights of the Church of the whole world? Therefore, if the old doctrine had fled, if it did not exist, it is proven, and now it has begun. If it existed, it either fell silent in conflict, or was driven away by the judgment of knowledge and truth. Perhaps then you were a patron of the doctrine not only in life, but you were a bishop. You remained silent, and your companions and disciples, and co-teachers, and throughout all that time afterward, until the emperor was in Rome, you heard many contrary things, being a guest among those men whom you now anathematize, angry either because they wrote the faith without you. Or were you forced by the magistrates, sent as an envoy in defense of betrayal? But what difference does it make, whether thirty, or seventy, or more, and whether the same faith has often been made to destroy other heresies? Since it is one, and begins from one, and has worked until now.
But you write these things and say that Paul of Samosata, and Marcellus, and Photinus, and now Valens and Ursacius, and others of this kind found in heresy were destroyed. Were they saying "homoousion"? No. How then were they blaspheming? Paul of Samosata like Arius: out of nothing, and that there was a time when he was not, that the Son was made, and entirely in every way unlike the Father. What about Marcellus and Photinus? They said Jesus was only a man from man, and the Trinity was outside of Jesus. And now Valens and Ursacius are the remnants of Arius. Therefore, their own blasphemy, for which they were cast out. But then you conquered them because you say "homoousion," for they did not say "homoousion," and thus they were defeated.
Let us then also see what you say, and how you say it. Thus think the Africans, and all the Easterners. Why then do you write to them, to eject "homoousion" from the holy Church? They say this: It should not have been written to them. If it should have been written, it should also persuade them, not only by command, but by reasons and holy scriptures. For you ought not only to destroy "homoousion," but also to establish "homoousion." But now above and below in the perversion of "homoousion" you say nothing else, except that those who say this must confess that the substance preexists, and thus that the Father and the Son are expelled.
First, it is not necessary. For God is both substance, and the cause of substance, and preexists all things that are, and all existence, and all essence. For from him are all things and those that are, and names. Therefore, from this God the beginning of substance who is, and therefore who is substance, the Son is "homoousion" in him and with him. Indeed, the form of him who is and the image and character, without which God is not understood nor does intelligence ascend. Yet not that he is not, since God is simple; and not that these are as if something else, which are in themselves, or as accidents, but that God himself is. And thus to be "homoousion" is what it is to be, and the Father is what it is to be. But as the Son is, for God is what it is to be, thus the Word is, and this signifies always what he says: "I and the Father are one" (John 10:30). And: "The Father is in me, and I in the Father" (John 14:10). And: "If anyone has seen me, he has seen the Father, for we are homoousion" (John 14:9).
What then does he say, saying: substance preexists, "homoousion" is? What if "homoousion" is, it is not necessary to understand thus that substance preexists, from which these two are substance similar?
Have these things happened? According to your reasoning, you fall into the same trap that you fear in the term homoousion.
Do you alone have the right to understand homoousion, with the Father giving substance to the Son? But we do not have this conception that homoousion exists, with the Father as the cause for the Son to exist, the substance being God, and you admit homoousion: for you say that both the Father and the Son exist.
Who is like whom? According to dignity and the dignity of the names, the Son to the Father? But also the Father to the Son: for all things relate to one another. If likeness means that, and we say homoousion, we say that the Son is like the Father.
And how do we understand the saying of Isaiah? For he says: Before me there was no other God, and after me, there will be none like me (Isaiah 43:10).
What then is the logos? Before God, after God, or with God? If before God, not unbegotten God nor Father God, nor the beginning of beginnings: but if after God, not ὅμοιος, but another similar God. But if you call this blasphemy, not only in power, dignity, deity, but also in substance: what does it mean to be similar in substance? From that very substance, according to that very substance, it is the same, not similar: for similarity is made by quality, which is likeness in color, habit, affection, virtue, form.
However, Jesus, that is, the logos, is the image of God, not similarity. He is called the image of God, for not God is the image, but God in image and substance is God, not as two, for there is one substance, one image, hence one God, and one logos, and one Father, one Son, and these are one: one indeed and this one, not two: and therefore together, and the substance itself is what is another one, and therefore this is not another one, but rather and only one.
But these things. And again, what do we say substance is, as the wise and the ancients have defined? What is subject, what is something, what is in another not being; and they give the difference between existence and substance, and existence indeed and existentiality pre-existing subsistence without accidents, pure and alone those things which are in it, which is solely what subsists; but substance as subject with all those which are accidents, existing separately in it, in use however receiving both existence and substance, wherever signifying in the same way to be something we use these names.
Let it be thus, whether in eternal things or in worldly things: for it is allowed to say either existence, or substance, or what truly is substance: there is motion, and not simply motion, but the first motion, which is kind and itself status, and therefore itself substance. But these are of a longer and different question.
Now we confess that there is substance, which has according to its proper meaning this: to be something on; against those who say the name of substance is not found in the holy scriptures. Not indeed is the substance perhaps not named from the substance, where indeed derived ἐπιούσιον than from substance (Matthew 6:11): Give us this day our daily bread? Since Jesus is life, and his body is life, but the body is bread, as it is said: Give us bread from heaven. ἐπιούσιον signifies out of it, or in it substance, which is the bread of life.
So again Paul in the Epistle to Titus (Titus 2:14): A people περιούσιον, around substance, that is around life consisting people, as it is also said in the offering: Cleanse for yourself a people around life zealous for good works around your substance coming. It seems to me the same is signified in the prophet Jeremiah, where he says (Jeremiah 23:18, according to the Septuagint): For who has stood in the substance of the Lord, and seen his word? Who has listened and heard?
And shortly after he says (Jeremiah 23:22): And if they had stood in my substance, but they write in the substance of substance, not in non-substance. But if anyone surely understands the meaning, he finds nothing else, but this: If anyone stands in what is of God, that is in substance, which in itself ὁμοούσιος the son, immediately sees his λόγον; for we must make what is further, something internal stand, the mind in substance, subs...
Here is the translation of the provided Latin text into modern, easy-to-understand English:
The magnitude of God, that is, in substance, and we immediately understand both God and the Logos, for they are of the same essence, and both together are one.
But you see. Let us suppose we say the substance of God is that which is being, and that of Jesus which is being, being God, and piety, and confession: what then is the substance of God? If substance is spoken of in worldly terms, like an animal, like a human, it is necessary to say in eternal terms that the substance is God. But you see God Himself according to that being which we speak of, either as light, or spirit, or being itself, or the power of that which is being, or universal intelligence, or the power of universal intelligence, or universal life or action, or other such things in which it is, the source of all that truly are, or that exist.
But the scriptures say God is light, spirit: these signify substance, not an accident; to which the first thing that is being happens, if this is an accident? But to none: for it is impossible for anything to be beyond that which is being. Therefore substance, according to being, is light, and spirit, which is simple and uncompounded, which there and the same light and spirit: but the image of light and spirit, not by necessity of nature, but by the will of the greatness of the Father: for He Himself encompassed Himself.
And therefore it is said, you understand yourself, but also intelligible to the Son, the Son therefore in the Father is the image, and form, and Logos, and will of the Father, according to the will of the Father, different according to the will of the Father the Son. For every will is offspring, according to universal will, the only begotten, once the Logos of all fullness sprang from the power of God: this power being the Logos begot the Logos, that is, brought it into manifestation and operation. Thus by the will of the Father, the will appeared as the Logos Son: thus the will of God is the Logos with Him who always is, and to Him the will itself is filiation: therefore the Father, whose will it is, the Son is the will, and the will itself is the Logos: therefore the Logos is the Son. For the Logos is not a mere speech, but the power to create something, conversing with those to whom it is to be according to the being, the virtue proper to each one's substance, and the form of the Logos itself, which is the knowledge of God: for through the Logos alone knowledge is effected.
Therefore it is said the Logos is toward God, and the Logos is the word, light from light, or spirit from spirit, and substance from substance, not first and second in time, but according to which cause is to the other, so that it may be power: always together, for the radiance of light is not cut off, but always in the light and being light itself, it operates all as the Logos, moving itself, and always moving, having abundance: that of the Father being almighty.
What then is the similarity here, which by counsel is to be made and generated, as you say, to the generation of the Son? The Father moves Himself, the Son generates Himself; but the power of the Father generates the Son Himself: for will is the Son, for if that will is not generating itself, neither is it will: but since it is the will of God, indeed that which is generating, is generated in God. And therefore God is the Father, will is the Son, both are one, rather even one, and only one not by combination, but by simplicity: proceeding indeed by will into active power, not departing however from its own substance and the same motion: these three are one there, substance, motion, will.
Substance is the Father, according to that same motion and will: again the Son is motion and will, and according to that same substance, and this is of the same essence. Let us have for example what I now say: for it is now fitting to say, since many say the soul is in the body, but now according to common usage the soul is in the body. The soul in the human body is, in that which the soul is, substance, like matter, or body. For these are two worldly substances. And just as matter has form, that is, species, as it is body, or something else; one indeed materially is in a concrete mass. For it is necessary for something to be of a certain quantity.
No matter how much it is that is material; for matter is defined by quantity so that it exists and becomes a substance, now being something. In this way, the soul, which is an incorporeal substance, has definition and image: a living power and intellectual, being twofold in power and of twin light. For it both gives life to animals, and has a defiled mind, and is of the same substance. Thus, all things are of the same substance: for both substance and motion are the same in the soul, according to its subject, by which it lives and gives life, and by which it understands.
Intelligence is one in motion, as it is one itself, which is its form, for it is defined by motion, and exists as one being with double power in one motion: of life and intelligence. Impassively, indeed these, in action two, in one motion, that is, what is generated, and the only-begotten Son of the soul, he himself life, he himself being mind, and the first power with that which is to him life. For what he is, this is what life is: that being is for him what substance is, and life is, and above life; for it does not give life to another, nor to itself: for it does not receive from another as if it were something else, for what it is to be for him, is to be moved, and to be motion; and what is motion, this is life; and what life is, this is intelligence.
These indeed I call substantial motions, life, intelligence, saying none of the motions of sensible things nor transition to place. Therefore, these two, life and intelligence, are of the same substance as being, that is, of the soul. These two are one motion, which indeed is the first power of life, for its form is life. For it defines infinite being, which is the first power of motion, but the second power itself is motion; for what is defined, and intelligence is comprehended by life, innate intelligence and substance, according to what it is intelligence and subsisting, and by itself derived from the substance of life. These two are one, and one according to motion is the son, the only-begotten of the soul, suffering nothing of passion according to what is of the soul.
But this is either mother or father of the only-begotten son, proceeding in double power by motion, which alone suffers; for motion is passion, and by motion passion, for in motion motion and state; but being in motion is passion, and being in motion from the state is passion, therefore also motion: therefore all passion is by motion. But this double, according to life and intelligence: according to life indeed passion, because it still needs another which it wants to vivify, and therefore according to what it participates, and otherwise suffers passions even unto death. But according to intelligence, because it also needs what is intelligible, so that intelligence may subsist; it incurs more passions and weaknesses, and is turned by insensible things, and is led around by imagination into false subsistence.
With these existing, suffering these, the soul remains according to substance, keeping in the seed of motion the power of life and intelligence, by which always remaining life and intelligence is kindled, but more it raises up, if into the fountain of life, that is, into Christ, and into the fountain of intelligence, that is, into the Holy Spirit, the resurrected soul rises up.
But these are as in similitude. Of God and of the Word, that is, of the Son Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit using more divine intelligence, let us accept the unity of their same substance.
First to be inquired, if God is the same, and to be God, or something else?
If the same, then to be is, and to act: but if to be God is different, to be God is preexistent, being in power to that which is to be, which truly more is what is to be: for power preexists all things and is the beginning, and is before what truly is.
But this they estimate blessedly, to be in rest altogether in every way: to be in motion only which is the cause of all in whatever motion existing.
And they say this is conceived by foreknowledge, which itself is nothing by itself, but is taken up by the conception of what preexists.
But scripture, and all intelligence, understand this: God and
He says that before Him, there was nothing, and He is that which exists and acts. This is the God we acknowledge and worship, the beginning of all things: for things exist through action, as before action, they do not yet exist. We accept God as active, as in the beginning God made the heavens and the earth, and He made the angels, man, and all things in the heavens and on the earth.
Therefore, this is the true God and the only God, both in power and in action, but eternally: just as Christ is both in power and in action, but already outward and revealed. Thus, the Father God is the first action, the first existence, and substance, and the principal being, generating Himself without beginning, always existing from Himself, infinite in existence, perfect in every way, omnipotent, unchanging, always existing in the same manner, substantial in Himself: the Word existing so that all things might be, not as something else, or as another, but existing together in simplicity and unity as one. For that which the Word is, is the same as that which is existence, and by that which is existence, the Word is: for the Word is God, therefore one and of the same substance. For God is not without action, but God acts, as it is said.
The substance of God is the image, action, and the Son, through whom He is understood and declared to be, as it is written in the Gospel of John, chapter 14, verse 9: "He who has seen Me has seen the Father." And the substance itself exists, having being from itself. For the cause of it is that in which it exists, the image itself is His Son, in whom He exists by ineffable generation, and by the greatest ungenerable generation, or rather by ever-generating generation, as Alexander also said. And it is said that the Father is always, the Son always existing together.
Therefore, always of the same substance, existing together, one existing, the Son is in the Father; and when He acts, He proceeds: when He proceeds, the Father is in the Son. How do we say this? God and the Word are one and united, and therefore of the same substance, but as God, according to what God is, whose being is power, and of all things that are, to that which is being, the cause is the Word according to what it is: the Word is the paternal power, to make that which is being exist: the principal being, and the beginning, and the perfection. For from that which is universal being, and above universal being all universal being, and according to genera, and according to species being, and individuals, that which is being has. If therefore the Word has being, for the Word is that which is being itself and the Word, therefore from that which is above universal being, being is: but the universal being is the Word: but God is that which is above universal being, and the Son is that which is universal being: therefore the Father is above universal being, of the same substance in that which is being, to that which is being, and that which is above universal being to the universal: this indeed is also a progression; for from that which is above universal, the universal proceeds, and certainly proceeds more to the understanding, and remains, for the universal is not abandoned.
Therefore, what is universal subsists by itself and is within that which is above universal: therefore it is connected, and inseparable; and this is called the radiance of light, having all of the light, but not receiving, nor being born, but con-natural, always existing of the same substance. Therefore not by local motion, nor by change: for the Father is unchangeable, and the Son is unchangeable, and always the Father, always the Son, even if the Son is believed to be the image existing in the Father, and the form of His being, as it is said, or according to the progression the Son is the radiance of light. With these thus existing, and more one existing, for the radiance is the splendor of light, and it has the light in itself from the Father and is in the light and outward: therefore the Son is in the Father, and what is joined is the splendor of light, more to be the splendor called to the light, not in the light; even if it shines from the light it is in the light, and this signifies (John, chapter 1, verse 1): "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God": therefore of the same substance are the Son and the Father, and always these, and from eternity, and into eternity.
We also say other things. The Word is with God, it is well known. What is the Word? through which...
Everything, and in whom everything, and for whom everything; it is agreed that this is Jesus. The Logos is the Son of God, but Jesus, about whom Paul says in Colossians 1:13: "He has rescued us from the power of darkness, and transferred us into the kingdom of the Son of His love." So who is this Son? He says in Colossians 1:14, "in whom we have redemption, through His blood, the forgiveness of our sins." Who is this? The one who was born of Mary. What then? Is it just that? Is it mainly about the one who was from Mary? He existed even before Mary.
What does he introduce in Colossians 1:15, "who is the image of God"? Is it just about Mary? No: for the image of God is eternally the image. So if we have hope in the Son, and He has redeemed us with His blood; and He is the image of God; then the image is the Son of God. Do I say this? Not alone, but Paul also; for how does he say in Colossians 1:15? "The firstborn of all creation." Who is the firstborn? The Son. Who is the Son? The Son who is of Mary. Who is the son of Mary? The firstborn of all creation. Who is the firstborn of all creation? The one who is the image of God.
It is necessary that the firstborn be before all creation as the image of God. But who is the image? The Logos. Who is the Logos? The one who was in the beginning: For without the image, how is God? And who is the Logos? John 1:2-3: "Who was with God, and through whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made." How is the image the Logos? And the Logos the Son? And the same one who is from Mary? But more so, the one who is in the one from Mary. From this it is clear, if the Son of God redeemed us with His blood, who is the son of Mary, and He is the image of God; He is the Son of God: for if He is the firstborn of all creation, necessarily the son, is He another? By no means: for He is the only-begotten Son of God. It is necessary, therefore, that He be the same Son, and image, and the one who is from Mary. For how is the image of God the Son if not the firstborn of all creation? And how is the image of God, the one who is the Son from Mary, born after all? It is clear, therefore, that He is the firstborn.
What then of the one born of Mary? Is he not a creature? But if the Son of God, the image of God, is born before all creation, He is the one in Him who was born of Mary. It is therefore clear that He is the only-begotten.
After that, it must be seen how the same one is both the image and the Son and the Logos. It is agreed that the image is the Son. For Paul said in Colossians 1:15: "The Son of God is the image of God." I say He is the Logos, of whom it is said: "In the beginning was the Logos." For Paul says how the Son is the firstborn of all creation, that in Colossians 1:16-18 "in Him all things were created, in the heavens and on the earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities. All things were created through Him and for Him: and He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together." You see what he said about the Son, that He is the firstborn, because all things were created by Him, and through Him, and for Him. So, he says three things, from which it is said, all things by Him, to whom it is given always, which is in the confession to the Logos.
If Paul gave to the Son by Him; but what is by Him, John gave to the Logos first among the Apostles and Evangelists: all agree in their words. Why doubt, then, that the Son is the Logos? What about the other two things he gave to the Son, whose own are they more? Necessarily of the Logos; for His power is the subsistence of all things. But if also, in Him all things are, as it is said, that in Him all things were created, and therefore in Him all things, because all spiritual things will be made, which Paul also signifies, in the consummation of the world in First Corinthians 15:28: "For when all things are subjected to Him, then the Son Himself will also be subjected to the one who subjected all things to Him, so that God may be all in all." What is this, and how afterward? Now how spiritual things. It is true then that the Son of Mary is the Son of God, and He is the image and He is the Logos, and He is before the ages and all creation, and that all creation was made through Him, and for Him, and from Him, and consequently what has been said.
Who then is senseless, who is the sacrilegious Arius?
Who sees without God? Jesus? And where does the only begotten Son come from?
However, both God and the Word being of the same essence, that is, both the Father and the Son, is clear from these:
What Paul gave to the Son, he also gave to the Father, these three with paternal dignity in one, so that both divinity and substance, and paternal power appear as one.
He said this about the Son in the letter to the Colossians.
But in the letter to the Romans about the Father, he said the same:
For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor? Or who has given a gift to him that he might be repaid?
For from him and through him and to him are all things.
Do you see how the same things are given to both the Father and the Son, in the same essence?
First three and three, then the same to both the Father and the Son: and this by whom all things are given to both the Father and the Son.
Because the Son is the Word, who is the active power of all things, in those things which exist, and because the Father is in the Son, the Father also exists as active power in him:
For the Son is in the Father, and the Father is in the Son:
Therefore one power, that is, one substance exists:
For where there is power, there is substance: power is not different from substance.
Therefore, the same is true for both the Father and the Son.
This by whom all things exist, and the Son himself: this therefore is proper to the Father: in whom all things exist, which is the Word and the place: for he himself is the receptacle of deeds and works through himself.
Where all things exist, the fullness is made: for Jesus is the Father of all works, those through himself.
Therefore, the Father and the Son are one.
But the works do not enter from the outside: where from then?
For there is nothing outside; therefore, all things are in himself:
Therefore, he is both the receptacle and the inhabitant.
And because the Father is in the Son, and the Father is the inhabitant: therefore, it is proper to the Son in whom all things exist, therefore this, and in himself, I say, is common:
For in the end all things are one, and therefore Paul says to the Corinthians:
There is one God the Father from whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus, through whom are all things, and we through him.
Or how is another in him?
For in other places it is so stated of the Father, from whom are all things, through whom are all things, in whom are all things.
But of the Son, in whom are all things, through whom are all things, in whom are all things:
Therefore, Paul gave all things equally to both the Father and the Son: rightly.
Because the Father and the Son are of the same essence, and therefore it is said:
Then the Son himself will also be subjected to him who put all things in subjection under him, that God may be all in all.
See the power of the one speaking; he leads (or perhaps concludes) the same essence:
The Son subjects all things to the Father by his own power, as it seems, but as it is paternal: for he says:
He will be subjected to him who put all things under him.
To whom will he be subjected? To God.
Who will be subjected? The Son, to whom God subjects all things.
Therefore, the action is both of the Father and the Son. Where then is the substance?
In which the action itself is, and more so, the action, which is the substance, therefore the same essence.
Paul also says this:
When he delivers the kingdom to God and the Father. He himself therefore now reigns, and according to his own action Christ subjects all things, and destroys enmities and even death itself:
He himself therefore subjects, as Paul says, when he abolishes all power.
Thus he says that the Son does these things by his own power.
He adds this too:
For he must reign.
Indeed, God is the king of all:
But because the Son is of the same essence, and especially the Word, that is, the power and wisdom of God; it is necessary that wisdom reigns first, through which all things are subjected;
For by the Word all things exist and are subjected:
For it is said, and it was said, that the Word that is the Son, subjects all things, and therefore Paul adds:
Until he makes all his enemies a footstool for his feet.
Who? Whose? Clearly, because the Son of the Father.
But because the Father is in the Son, therefore the Father subjects all things to the Son, and therefore the Son especially has enemies, not the Father:
And because both, that is, a good ambiguity of understanding, and therefore of the same essence:
The last enemy to be destroyed is death:
For if Jesus is life and eternal life, death will be destroyed by life:
Therefore all things Jesus, that is, the Son subjects to the Father.
But because he is of the same essence as the Father and the substance itself, and the power itself, and the same...
According to what it means to be a father, and what it means to be first, and then to act, live, and understand, since the cause of the two is what is first; it is necessary to say the father is subject to the son.
So, he says, when he hands over the Kingdom to God and the Father, necessarily the Son; and when he renders all rule and power empty, necessarily the Son. He says again First Corinthians 15:27: "When everything is subjected, it is clear that except for the one who subjects everything to him: not a small understanding."
But now let us move on. What does he want us to understand, that God, the cause who is, and all-powerful, and the principal power, made everything, when the Son acts? And if the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father, he acts in the Son, what the Son did; and John 5:19: "What the Father does, the Son does equally." Therefore, all things are given either to the Father or the Son, whether actions or rest: for in one to the other, and nothing of the other, because in one the other. And therefore, one alone, and nothing else, but the Father and Son are distinct persons, from one substance of the Father. The Son, that is, the Word, is active power, and what acts, and what gives life, and is intelligent: therefore creates everything justly and acts according to life, and regenerates according to the understanding of truth and God, which Jesus, being the Word, gives to all, both of all minds and universally of all things that are. If therefore he creates, and he regenerates everything, he subjects everything, not only humans, but also as Paul says, every rule and every power; does he do this as a man, or as the Word?
Indeed, subjecting itself is not only since the time he became the Son from Mary, but also before, and after. For if the flood happened, if Sodom and Gomorrah were burned, if these and many such things happened, if in the first presence he triumphs over enemies in himself, if in the second presence the last enemy, death, will be abolished; the Son, the Word, does these things, but with paternal power. Therefore, the spirit does all spiritual things, then he himself will be subjected to God, who subjects everything to him: for when everything is emptied, the active power rests, and God will be in him according to what it means to be, and according to what it means to rest: but in all others spiritually, according to his own power and substance. And this is First Corinthians 15:28, so that God may be all in all: for not everything is in each one, but God existing in all, and therefore God will be everything, because everything will be full of God.
Let us also say other things Romans 1:16: "For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of God." Paul calls Christ Jesus power and might, for this is what he calls the Gospel and about this First Corinthians 1:24: "Christ therefore is the wisdom and power of God." What then of the wisdom and power of God? Is he not God himself? For it is not as in bodies or corporeal things, where the eye is one thing, vision another. Or in fire, where the fire is one thing, its light another: for the eye and the fire need something else, and the eye needs another light, to be from it and in it; the vision of fire and air, to be from it light. But just as the power of vision has vision in itself when the power of vision is active, and vision is generated from the power of vision, the only-begotten itself: for nothing else is generated from it, and to the power of vision, vision is not only inward, but also inward in power, more outward in action, and therefore to power, since vision exists, vision is of the same essence as the power of vision, and one whole. And the power indeed rests, but vision is in motion: and through vision, all visible things are made, and the passions around vision exist, with the power of vision being impassible and generating vision without passion. So, therefore, both the power and the wisdom of God are God himself, the whole, which is simple, and which is one, and of the same substance, and simultaneously from eternity, and always, and from the Father, who is his own generator. Therefore, wisdom and the power of action, this indeed signifies power now: for he joined wisdom and power. Therefore, the power of these is God, and therefore the Father, because from him are these: for he generates these into action and impassibly.
Because power and action, and God, and God's power and wisdom are consubstantial, when they are active, they take care of things outside and are always giving wisdom to God, always giving life, not God, but through themselves, everything created by God. And if any passion exists, it is a passion in action.
In this way, whether Jesus is the Word, or light, or radiance, or form, or image, or power and wisdom, or character, or life, the Word and God the Father, and the Son, the Spirit, and Christ, will appear consubstantial.
Let us bring in the same things again. When we call Christ life, how is he consubstantial with God?
John says in John 1:3-4, "What was made had life in itself." And again, in John 5:26, "Just as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself."
What is so simultaneous? What is so identical? The Father has life in himself: the Son also has life in himself. What does it mean to have life in oneself? To be life itself, not to receive life from another, but to give it to oneself and others.
Someone might say it is of similar substance, but not consubstantial. That has been stated already, because similar substance is not spoken of: for it is not according to what substance is, but more if it is of the same substance, it is called the same substance, not similar, for similar is according to qualities, as fire is substance, and air is the same in substance, for both are matter: but in qualities similar or dissimilar, in the notion of virtues, and other similarities.
Say earth and water in gravity and density, or other such things, in which it happens that whatever are similar, are also dissimilar, each having different qualities. For similar is not the same, nor the same one, but the same twin: one, and these are not substance, but one in number.
We are now inquiring about substance, which is in God, or the Son, or is itself, or the same: or in a certain way both itself and the same. How then is it itself when the Son is present, doing so many things both in heaven and on earth, and entering into flesh?
How is Jesus the Son, which signifies the Father, how are there three substances, God, the Word, the Holy Spirit: for it is not right to say, nor permissible to say, that there is one substance, three persons. For if this same substance both did everything and suffered, then we are Patripassians: God forbid.
What then? It is the same, but not itself: but if this, or with pre-existing substance two, or from the same by division, or by loss of part of the same, it became the same: neither by division nor by diminution was the Son born, but the Father is perfect, and always perfect, and always Father: the Son is perfect, and always perfect, and from eternity and to eternity the Son. How then the same, in two things that are the same? but the Father and the Son are one, and who is Father, Father: and who is Son, Son.
And the Father and the Son are not the same, nor the Son the Father of whom he is the Son. Therefore they are not one: neither itself, nor is the same substance. So it remains that in a certain way it is both itself and the same. For it is not right to say that the Father and the Son are of a different substance: because we will say that it is itself, whether we say God and the Word, or God and God's power and wisdom.
Whether what is being and life, or what is being understanding, or understanding life, or the Father and the Son, or light and radiance, or God and character, or God and form and image, or substance and species, as there, not as here, or substance and motion, or power and action, or silence and utterance itself to be the substance.
For saying that God is being, the Son is life; how do we separate life from being, whether in the Father or in the Son? For indeed the Father has life in himself, and the Son, except that the Son received what he has from the Father. Therefore the Father and the Son originated from themselves, powerful in life from themselves, understand how to say having, as the Gospel says, for the Father has life in himself. Having then, not as another but itself, but in understanding.
We have said these things. So if the Father has life in himself, he is life, and substance.
Her life is, and so is the son's. For he says in John 14:6: "I am life." Therefore, the Father is life, and the Son is life. All life as life is, is motion, giving life to those who can be revived. Therefore, the definition of soul and life is this: to move itself to be.
And as its substance is called, much more so in God and the Word. What then did we say? The Father is life and substance, and a self-moving substance. Nothing else is self-moving motion except life itself, therefore both substance and life. Since in motion, intelligence is almost perceived as something else, and not perfectly another. But living itself is as if mixed in both with the other, as life is, and motion is, it is one.
Again, as life is, it is one in itself and another, and therefore the same substance. But whether it is itself, or the same, homoousion necessarily and simultaneously; since two are simultaneous; for without the other, the other never was. Therefore, one and one are these. Therefore, this is being life, and being motion through itself, the Father is. But this being motion, and being life through itself, the Son is.
For the cause of motion is life. Therefore, the Father is more principal life, having motion resting in the hidden, and moving within. But the Son is motion in the manifest, and therefore the Son, since he proceeded from what is within, is more motion, which is in the manifest. In this way also the Son is life from the Father, who thus takes life from the principal principle. The universal born from the universal, whole from whole.
And therefore he says in John 6:58: "The living Father sent me, and I live because of him." Therefore, if the begetter is in life, and the Son according to motion is the Son, but according to motion is life, the Father gives life to the Son in motion, generation, and life simultaneously, and he himself homoousion in himself. Therefore, the Father and Son are one always, and born from eternity, and one in the other, and inseparable separation. And in the Father, the Son, and in the Son, the Father, and the Son is especially action.
Since the Son with action is life, but the Father according to what is to be, is life, and according to what is to be life, is action. Therefore, the Father remains, and remains impassible. The Son operates, and leads into manifestation. And God operates within, with action existing according to power. And in the Father, and in the Son, there is action according to action.
These things should be referred back to all that we have previously stated: whether God is the Word, or light and radiance, or silence and utterance, or other things by which one and the same homoousion appears, and unbegotten generation. Therefore, where does what is similar to homoousion have a place to say? For what reason is it said?
Always and the whole mystery is this: One God, and Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit one God. How then is the similar one God? But homoousion necessarily one God. For if not simultaneously, necessarily two; but if that similar one is another, necessarily another homoousion; therefore necessarily of another substance. These Arians, these Lucianists, these Eusebians, these Illyrians, but rejecting some, taking away some and changing, all heretics of different opinions.
This is added, if the Father and Son are homoousion, how does the Savior say in John 14:6: "I am the truth"? If what is said is true, the Son, since he is the truth, the Father is lesser, similar to the truth, not the truth. How much blasphemy is this?
But if the truth is God, the truth is the Son, as the Son himself says, and truly says, homoousion God is the Son. Therefore not double, but always one truth, and very far, and very low, which is similar to the truth, which perhaps in the world exists as a likeness of the truth, where also error, and corruption, and all passion exists.
Therefore, being the truth itself is substance; for substance is not different from the truth. For what is simple, this is the truth, simple God, simple Son, truth God, truth Son, and God and Son one truth. For the truth in itself is truth.
Again, if the Son is similar to the truth, that is, what is similar leads, what leads? But if the truth, it leads into the truth. But indeed it leads to God.
God is truth, and He leads into truth. But it is impossible for Him, not being truth Himself, to lead into truth; therefore the Father and the Son are truth, as it is said in John, chapter 6, verse 37: "All those that the Father gives me will come to me." From all these things, it is not only concluded but clearly established that there is no change or movement in God. For there is no local generation, nor generation with passion, corruption, increase, or decrease, nor any kind of change; for to move there is to be, and being itself is simple and one in understanding, power, and action.
Always indeed, homoousion (of one substance) in being, and in action from being, both the Son and the Father. But as it is said, the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father.
Is there any fear from this, that we may seem to be Patripassians by saying these things? The serpent's doctrine differs greatly from the truth. For they say that God alone, whom we call Father, is the only being and maker of all, and that He came not only into the world but also into the flesh, and did all other things which we say the Son did. If we call the Father, Father, and the Son, Son, one and the same, and therefore logos (Word), which is one, not only saying one but one and the same. One is impassible, the other has suffered, so how are we Patripassians?
For God does not proceed from Himself, nor is His action manifest, nor as in motion: what is within is not motion; but the logos in the power of motion is more motion and action, carried by its power into the effecting of things that are. For where there is logos, there is the cause of things that are; where the cause is, it does not always remain in itself, which is in what logos is. And in this way, it is unchangeable and immutable, but in things according to their kinds: which are different from each other, by the universal logos, remaining the same in the Father.
So where are the passions? Neither in the Father nor in the Son, but according to their own kind, not to be received, the entire power of the logos, whatever universal: each one existing and distributing its own, like Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers, souls, and sensible things, even flesh itself. Therefore, passion in these, and according to these, not of the logos, that is, the Son. According to the flesh, the Savior suffered, but according to the spirit, He was without passion. Thus our doctrine differs from that of the Patripassians.
For it is not the Son's suffering, as said, nor doing anything nor speaking: all things are done by divine power without passion, and this is more clearly divine and substantial motion, not passion. Moreover, the Patripassians did not arise from this, but from the cross: sacrilegiously saying that the Father was crucified, implicating the impassible in passion, and not understanding that something impassible must necessarily exist if there is something that suffers. We, however, say that the Son is impassible, but according to the logos made flesh, passible.
Yet compassion, anger, joy, and sorrow, and other such things are not passions there, but nature and substance. If therefore the spirit is benevolent, He Himself is good in Himself, to some leading to life, to others to death; not changed in His nature, but by the material and will of those suffering, the unchangeable divinity is said to be affected as appropriate or otherwise, or to suffer: because we judge divine things by our senses. For in sensible things, according to the animal, which is the soul using the body, or the animated body, it is said to suffer according to sense: but truly the passions are not of the soul alone, much less of the spirit of the logos and God. For the divine nature is impassible.
Let the Patripassians depart, for we say both Father and Son, He alone passible according to movement in matter. Let the Arians depart, for we say the Son is of the same nature, begotten before all creation. Let those who say Christ is from the being of God, who is God, also depart: for we say the Son is of the nature, and from the Father.
And in the Father. Let the disciples of Marcellus and Photinus depart, for we say that the Word was in the flesh, not that there is one Word and another man in whom they say Christ is, but that the Word itself took on flesh. For they say that there is God, and the Word, and the Spirit, but a fourth son, that is, a man from Mary, whom the Word assumed and ruled as a servant, and to whom they say a seat is prepared. Thus, they have fallen away from the Trinity.
If, however, the Trinity remains alone, the man and the Word; whom we have shown above as the Son. This does not mean: and the Word became flesh, as if the Word was corrupted and turned into flesh, but the Word through whom all things were made, and all made, and became flesh so that being in the flesh, he might redeem the whole man through his passion and death according to the sufferings of the body. For if the man from Mary was not himself, why did he empty himself? And what is Philippians 2:7 "taking the form of a servant"? And what again is John 1:14, "and the Word became flesh"? Let the followers of Basil depart, the homoousians. For we say homoousion, both in truth and according to the Synod in Nicaeapoli. For thus both the Father and the Son are one, always, and together, and because they are homoousion.
But what they call homoousion, even if they confess that the Son has substance from the Father, they say something else, saying that the Son is neither by generation nor by making from God, but by the compulsion of these two, generation and making, like a stone and iron, and from there a flame is emitted. Those who say such things are hidden Arians. Firstly, not saying that the Son of God is by generation, but by making, which is the doctrine of Arius; for making is that which leaps forth from compulsion and is from nothing. For a flame is not from iron or stone, which Arius madly believes. Even if a collision was made, there was a time when it was not: and if the Son was made by the compulsion of making and generation, then making and generation existed before the Son. These are later matters. How then is there compulsion? And this is of Arius: then how is there this collision? And of whom and in what? Is it a collision of wills in God? Is it of passions or different movements, especially contrary motions? And if the Father, who is without passion, suffered this, and the Son did not appear from his own substance: for by the collision of two either wills or passions, neither will nor passion was made, much less substance from the paternal substance, but some substance from outside, which would exist from nothing about the Word to the Father. To suspect this is impious blasphemy.
We have spoken about homoousion, and we have spoken sufficiently: for this was our purpose. But how, if homoousion, the Son is always with the Father, and proceeds, and descends, and ascends, and is sent, and does what is of the Father's will, and how, being the image of God, he sits at the right hand of God, and what is the right hand, and what is sitting, and what is through whom all things were made, and how all things, and what is "nothing was made without him," and how he has a will, and what he does, he does by the will of the Father, and how he is perfect, and from a perfect Father as imperfect he took on a body, and now bears a body, and if it is holy and spiritual, and like those of men, who after will be holy, and how always moves, and generated from himself by the power of the Father: for all these things define homoousion. If anyone is worthy to understand, he will find in this book that Faith is so, and we say this by the permission of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, lest anyone understanding my doctrine blasphemously say, for everything is said and is from the holy scripture.
We will say especially that from which many heresies arise, that the Gospels, and the Apostle, and all the old Scripture say everything about God, and about Jesus Christ, that is about the incarnate Word, for he performed the mystery of our salvation, he made us free, he redeemed us: in him we believe according to the cross, and according to the resurrection from the dead our Savior, therefore Paul says: "For I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ, and him crucified" First Corinthians.
Chapter 2, 2
We confess, therefore, God the Father Almighty,
we confess the only-begotten Son Jesus Christ,
God from God, true light from true light,
the form of God, who has the substance from God's substance,
nature, generation, the Son together with the Father,
of the same substance, which the Greeks call ὁμοούσιος,
firstborn before the creation of the world, and firstborn
before every creature, that is, both before
the essence of coming into being, and generation, and revival,
firstborn from the dead, the Word, who is the universal
Word of all, the Word to God, the Word in the last
times incarnate, and by the cross overcoming
death and all sin, our Savior,
judge of all, always of the same substance with the Father
and ὁμοούσιος, active power from the Father's power, and
generating, and making all things, and the essence
of existence of all, and generation, and revival:
since life is eternal, and God's power, and wisdom:
He Himself is unchangeable, immutable,
as the Word is, and as He is always the Word:
but as He creates all things, and especially in
the action on matter, suffering without being affected. As a fountain of waters
unchangeable, unaffected, outside all motion,
when it flows, and comes into the river, believed to suffer according to the channel and
kinds and qualities of the land, always preserving
the power of its water, and as the river irrigates the land,
feeling no diminution, in what it is
to be water; so Christ is that river, of whom
the Prophet says: Who waters and fills the whole earth
(Genesis 2:6): but Christ waters everything, both visible
and invisible, with the river of life of all things which
are substance. In whom is life, that is Christ:
in whom the Holy Spirit waters, in whom is the power
of vitality, the Father and God: but all is one
God. We confess, therefore, also the Holy Spirit from God
the Father having all things, as the Word, that is, Jesus Christ
delivering to Him all things, which Christ has from the Father. And
in this way we confess that these three,
from this one, and one God, are of the same substance,
and always together, and the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit of ineffable power, and inexpressible generation
the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who is the Word, and
God, and image, and form, and character, and
radiance of the Father, and power, and wisdom of God,
through which God appears and is declared in the power of all,
and existing, and remaining, and doing all things according to
the action of the Son, that is, Jesus Christ, whom incarnate,
and crucified, and rising from the dead,
and ascending into heaven, and sitting at the right hand
of the Father, and coming as the future judge of the living and the dead,
the Father of all creation and the Savior, we confess
with voice and whole heart always, amen. Grace
and peace from God the Father, and His Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, to the one confessing these things in all ages of ages.
Spirit, Word, mind, wisdom, substance,
whether all are the same, or different from each other? And if
the same, by some communion, or universality? If
by some communion, what is first, what from the other,
and by what communion? if by universality both these, and what
difference, and what communion? if they are altogether different
in every way, one in the other as subject, the other as accident:
or according to another mode? If therefore altogether
different, and ἑτερόνυμα, and of different substance.
But nothing is of altogether different substance: for
of those which are, the kind of being, and more the kind in that which
is being. But since being is in two ways, and being itself
is in two ways, there is truly being, and there is only being. If
therefore being, truly being and only being to all beings, and
only being to only being, whether they are called synonymously or homonymously,
they are not altogether different: therefore by participation
of a certain communion all things which
are, are related to others. For that which is, this
which is not, is opposed, as contrary according to
privation with no participation to each other;
therefore neither is it in the other. If therefore those things which are, even if different
and other, are yet by a certain communion the same,
and in this way both the same and different they are.
In two ways, either in identity or the same in otherness; but if the same in otherness, they incline more towards otherness. But if different in identity, identity appears most clearly. Therefore, it is necessary to examine what harmonizes with these things.
Concerning God and the Word, that is, about the Father and the Son, it has been sufficiently said, with God's permission, since the two are one. It has also been said about the Word, that is, about the Son and the Holy Spirit, that they are in one. If therefore the two are one, and in one two; that one in which the two are, since it is with that one and has been with it from eternity always: those things that are together and mutually the same, the two are one; therefore, it is necessary that these are the same. How this is:
Listen as I say. Before all things that truly exist, there was one, or the one itself, before it became one. For that one must be said and understood, which has a single imagination of otherness, one alone, one simple; one by concession, one before all existence, before all existentiality, and especially before all lower things, even before being itself, for that one is before being. Before all essence, substance, subsistence, and still all the things that are more powerful, one, without existence, without substance, without intelligence. For above these, it is immense, invisible, indiscernible universally, and in those things which are in it, and in those things which are after it, even those things which are from it. But to itself alone and discernible, and defined by its own existence, not by action, so that nothing else exists in it by consistency, and knowing itself impartially from everywhere, without shape, without quality, nor inequality; without quality as such, without color, without appearance, without form, lacking all forms. Nor is it the form by which all things are formed, both of everything universal and partial that exists. The first cause of all beginnings, the beginning of all intelligences, the preintelligence of all powers, stronger than motion itself, more stable than stability itself. For in motion there is an inexpressible state, and in a state there is an ineffably superior motion. Denser in all continuity, higher in all distance, more defined than all bodies, and greater than any magnitude, purer than any incorporeal, penetrating all intelligence and bodies, the most powerful of all, the power of powers, greater than all kinds, all power, all species, truly being all things itself, greater than any whole, both corporeal and incorporeal, greater than any part in an indescribable power, pure, existing beyond all things that truly are.
This is God, this is the Father, preintelligence, preexisting, and preexistence, keeping His own blessedness and immovable motion within Himself, and therefore not needing others, perfect above the perfect, thrice-powerful in singularity, a perfect spirit and above spirit. For He does not breathe, but is only spirit in that which it is to be for Him, spirit breathing into Himself, so that He is spirit; for He is a spirit inseparable from Himself, He is His own place, and remains in Himself alone in solitude, existing everywhere, and nowhere in simplicity, one who is, combining all existence, all life, and all blessedness.
But all these things are one, and simple one, and most of all in the power of what it is to be, that is, the power of existence, life, and blessedness, for indeed it is and exists by the power, which is of existence, and the power is of life and blessedness itself through itself, and therefore the Word of Himself, and living, and acting, having according to itself His own inherent existence, the indiscernible union of spirit, divinity, substantiality, blessedness, intelligence, vitality, goodness, and universally everything in every way, purely unbegotten before, singularity of union without any union. Therefore, with this one existing, one therefore emerged from one, in substance one, in motion one, and indeed motion is existence, because existence is motion. Therefore, this one existentially one, but not like the Father existentially one, who is according to the power existentially one. For He has power, and more so, what will be according to operation.
To be, and according to the truth, does not possess it, but is because power, active coercion is everything. It is without trouble and truly in every way not needing, which is from this to be everything potential. For indeed, the action which is born of power requires acting itself unity.
Therefore, according to what we call being, one, one life is, which is infinite motion, creator of others, either of those which truly are or of those which exist. Being the Word, to that which is being which are, moving everything from itself, always in motion, having motion within itself, but more so it is motion itself. For the divine Scripture says, "For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son also to have life in himself"  (John 5:26). This Son is the Word, who is with God, this through whom all things were made, this Son and complete sonship of all fatherhood always who is both Son, and from eternity. But the Son moved himself by motion, for the power progressing, and as immobile pre-existing, and not moved according to what power was. This motion never rests and rises from itself, and hastens into all kinds of motion.
For life which is infinite, and itself appearing in vivification as if outwardly. Therefore, life necessarily is born, but life is the Son, life is motion, from vital pre-existence life, existing in constitution, and appearance of all wholes, which according to the power the Father is, so from the understanding of those which truly are pre-intelligence appears. This existence, therefore, is the life of all existence, and according to life, motion has as if a feminine power, which desired to vivify.
But since as demonstrated, this motion while being, and life is wisdom, entirely turned into wisdom, and more into the existence of the Father, more or backward motion moved into the Father’s power, and vivified by him life returning to the Father, made male. For life descends, wisdom ascends. However, the Spirit is also this. Therefore, the Spirit is both: in one two, and as existing life the first existence, necessity was to enter into virginal power, and from the virgin's birth a man to be produced, the Son of God.
For in the first motion, I say first coming into appearance, as it failed from the Father’s power, and in the desire inherent to vivify, existing inwardly as life, but by motion existing outwardly it returns to itself. Again turned into itself it comes into its paternal existence, made virtue and perfected. Thus, according to the type, the order had to be, and while in the body, the Spirit, that is, the Son Christ, and as if suffering diminution, and born of the Virgin, and by this as if diminution of its paternal virtue, that is, more divine and first existence to rise again and be renewed, and to return to the Father, that is, into existence and paternal power.
How this is, I still dare to say, so that our many incidents may be manifest by much exposition. Let us assume intelligence: according to this manner, God is the power of these three powers of existence, of blessed life, that is, of what is being, what is living, what is understanding. But in each of these, there are three, manifest and what is being first, and second what is being according to itself living and understanding, without any union, but simply simplicity and this manifest as demonstrated, that and such what is being, God being manifestly, as demonstrated; power capable of bestowing being to all, not from that which is being as giving part and paternal and creating power to each what is being proper to it. This, however, through ministering the Word, that is through the life which bestows living to all, and then subsists, someone receiving what is being according to what is receiving life.
If therefore the being of God, not from that which is being bestows to all, but ministering this which is life being; but life being in that which is of God, being one and the same is at rest, which is being of the Father, with that which is being of life according to the same.
Dependence is based on its power from the native power.
And since all natural power is will, it desires to move life by itself, inherently with impassive motion, directed toward what it is.
For natural will is not a passion.
Therefore, according to the being of God, in which the power of existence is, substantiality is native, according to power, according to this very being and life is.
So if life moved itself, and motion is will, then native motion and native will, since native power is life.
But if, according to what life is, motion is, then the proper motion of life is.
But since motion is carried from one to another, as from what is inside to outside, which is life and power, and nature, and will: and most importantly, the existence itself, therefore it is called effulgence or progression, or the manifestation of the elevated spirit, operating in giving life to what is the entirety of essence.
Therefore, of the life existing within, according to what is motion being life itself, the offspring of what is the father to be life is: according to what motion is.
But since motion, as motion, having no exaltation, goes out from what is inside, like sense from the one who is intellect, receiving fountain and universal power, according to motion both inside and outside: for motion is intellect, thus also life as motion, the son is made manifest motion from the motion of the father, which is hidden, which according to the first power is existence.
Again, life as motion proceeding from the father's motion, both inside and outside: but indeed life is motion: therefore life is both inside and outside, God lives, life itself lives, therefore both God and life are one.
So these two are both in each one, and different and the same: therefore in the son is the father, and in the father is the son.
Therefore truth exclaims, that these are of the same substance according to identity united with otherness.
Again, if the father is life, and the son is life, since the son is life as he is motion, both inside and outside, God lives, the son lives, and everything lives outside everywhere with the son existing.
And since the father is in the son, the father is everywhere.
Again, since the father is in the son: when you see the son, and understand, you will see and understand the father.
If anyone sees me, they see the father: for this is said.
Because the son is the form of the father: not now understood as a form outside the substance, nor as an appearance adjacent to the substance in us; but a certain subsisting substance, in which is seen and shown what is hidden and veiled in another.
But God is as something veiled: for no one sees God: therefore the son is the form, in which God is seen.
For if God is existence, power, substance, motion, and life hidden as without form.
Therefore, if life is manifest, and manifest according to the power of motion, life according to motion is understood, pronounced, seen in form.
Still, thus what is existence, the father: but what is life, the son, since it is impossible to comprehend what existence is: for that is hidden, but life as life already is existence: therefore in life appears what existence is, therefore life is what existence is.
But the father God is what existence is, but the son life, therefore the son is the form of the life of the father God, in which the native power is beheld.
Therefore, one must believe in the son of God, so that life becomes in us, which is both true and eternal life.
For if we have faith in Christ of Nazareth, incarnated from Mary, we will have the same son of God, who was and became the incarnated Spirit.
How I heard this, I say.
But first, it is necessary to see, how other things are attributed to the father, or to the son?
I say the Spirit, the word, the intellect, the holy Spirit, wisdom, substance, first the father and the son are the same, but the son and the holy Spirit are the same: therefore existence and life are the same; therefore existence and blessedness are the same: again, existence and life are the same, and life and understanding are the same.
This has been said about these in the book which is before this, and in others, which in the books before this.
I am in one, three, and therefore the same three: therefore the three are synonymous, according to the name that each of these holds in its own power. For what is being, and life, and intelligence: so also to one another; therefore the same and synonymous, the same co-generated, therefore also consubstantial.
But a certain otherness appears in these, and especially, therefore the same are not the same; for some of their power is hidden, and others are manifest and are understood. But existing in the same power, they are simultaneously powerful and consubstantial, and in these alone is found the same being, while in others from these in another identity being the same.
Now it must be examined what the other names placed first mean. I say spirit, word, mind, Holy Spirit, wisdom, substance.
The name of spirit is of substance or existence, which indeed signifies being, and is called and understood in what it is.
If you want to know what God is, His Spirit signifies what it is to be: therefore God and Spirit signify what it is to be.
Again, what is life? What spirit. Therefore spirit and life signify what it is to be: so also the Holy Spirit signifies what it is to be according to that very name, with the difference of the first two named by one name.
Which substantial difference, since it exists, signifies what it is.
From these it now appears, since substance in each existing signifies what it is to be. Therefore in these three, Spirit is substance, therefore consubstantial.
Since the Spirit is not divided Spirit: for one with three, but nature, power, and action are one existence with the Father, and having what it is to be in three generating substances are omnipotent: nor therefore did existence preexist.
For the Father is the generator of His own substance, and the existence of others according to the chief source: nor is existence itself divided: and existence and power in what it is to be, in each of these three according to all majesty and omnipotence, and in all ways perfection, which generates itself, substituting itself, moving itself, always moving itself, consubstantial, simultaneously powerful in what it is to be, and what it is to be with the Father giving it.
The Savior says: All that the Father has is mine, and therefore I said: He will take from what is mine (John 16:15); for He will not speak of Himself, but whatever He hears, He will speak (John 16:13).
Therefore the Holy Spirit, if He speaks, speaks from the Son; but He from the Father. Therefore the voice, and the word, and the Word, these three, because one three.
But the Father indeed speaks in silence, the Son manifestly, and in speech the Holy Spirit speaks not manifestly, but what He speaks, He speaks spiritually.
Therefore these three are true lights, but rather one light, truly one word, one voice, one Word, that is, one active power, consonant, before it makes something to be.
But it is manifest that the soul is another substance: For it is made by the tri-potent Spirit, neither purely voice, nor word, but as it hears so it speaks, rather an image of the voice than voice.
And this is the voice of John crying in the wilderness: Prepare the way of the Lord (Matthew 3:3): for the soul cries in the wilderness, that is in the world, because it is the Lord God and wants to be cleansed, to enjoy the Lord God; and this it says in testimony of God, and was sent into the world for the testimony of the testimony: for the testimony of God is Jesus Christ, therefore the Son of God, the son of John the Lord.
For John was not the light, but came to bear witness to the light (John 1:8).
Therefore the Word, and the voice is the Son, He is life, He is the word, He is motion, He is mind, He is wisdom, He is existence, and the first substance, He is potential action, He is being, the first being, from which all beings are, and through whom and in whom: who is the mediator in the Angel of the Trinity, declares the preexisting Father, and completes the Holy Spirit in perfection: for as the blessed Paul says: The Gospel is the power of God and wisdom (Romans 1:16): signifying the Son by power, that all things are through Him; for by the word of power all things are made.
And by the Holy Spirit, all things are made perfect.
Therefore, if God is these, simultaneously these three, because one and two, all things exist together in knowledge, existing together in life in the Father, in whom is the Holy and the Spirit according to being, because the three were one, and always are.
Therefore, if eternal life is the Son's radiance of pre-eternal life, and He is the life of perfect and eternal knowledge, then indeed perfect when He knows what and whose it is, because both Himself and by the Father's decree, then indeed existing within Himself, He does not become infinite, saving and saved by Himself, it is necessary to understand and say: that the power of God is in Him, which is the Father in the Son, but He was infinite by Himself.
And this means: "and the Word became flesh"  (John 1:14).
For by infinite motion descending into the lower life, and revitalizing corruption, which is why the universal Word and power of life became flesh, as the angel said:
"The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you"  (Luke 1:35).
Therefore, Jesus Christ was born according to the flesh from Mary, and from the Holy Spirit, the power of the Most High.
Therefore, all things, Christ our Lord, flesh, Holy Spirit, the power of the Most High, the Word. He fulfilled the mystery, so that all life with flesh illuminated by eternal light may return from all corruption to the heavens.
Therefore, neither flesh alone, nor the Holy Spirit alone, nor the Spirit alone, nor the Word alone, but all together our Lord Jesus.
Therefore, the Holy Spirit is all happiness in the first unbegotten generation, which is the only generation and is called, He was the Father, He was the Son.
For the Spirit, moved by Himself, which is perfect life in motion, wanting to see Himself, which is His power, the Father namely, became His own manifestation, which is the generation and is called, and according to this existing externally.
For all knowledge, as knowledge, is external to that which it desires to know. And I say external, as in the sight of seeing Himself: which is to know or to see that power pre-existing in the Fatherland.
Therefore, in this without the intellect of time by time, from what was being as if coming forth to inspect that which was because there all motion is the substance of otherness born, quickly returning to identity.
For it is not by the backside illumination, but as lights, or faces looking at each other in vision, the same one in the same way and perfectly subsisted. But lights all around as faces looking at each other, and they do not have a backside, and mystically God is said to be seen by the backside: there is no diminution therefore the whole always remained one, especially empowered by the union of the power of the Fatherland.
Therefore, the Holy Spirit is the first motion within, which is the thought of the Fatherland, which is self-knowledge: for pre-knowledge precedes knowledge. According to this natural mode of knowledge externally made, the Son was born, made life: not that He was not life, but because externally life more life, for in motion life.
This is the Word who is called Jesus Christ, through whom all things were made, the seed of all things as they are, because without life it is impossible for anything to be among those that are, and among those that are not, which are consequences.
But since we have said one motion and the same, both Word and Holy Spirit, the Word in that it is life: Holy Spirit in that it is knowledge, and understanding is: Because we have said that this is life and knowledge: and because we have said understanding moved in the first motion: For this natural and divine order being power it was necessary for understanding to move to the knowledge of itself.
The Son was born, the Word who is, which is life by the power of the Fatherland, generating understanding, which is the being of all things that are, like an eternal fountain. Therefore, it is not a mistake if someone understands the Holy Spirit to be the mother of Jesus, both above and below, above indeed as said, below in this way:
It was necessary, for the sake of liberation, that the divine, that is, the seed of all spirits universally existing, and what is the first being, that is, the universal Word λόγος, be incarnated from the lower matter and all corruption into the mortification of all corruption and sin. For darkness and ignorance of the soul, snatched away by material powers, needed eternal light for help, so that the Word of the soul and the Word of the flesh, through the mystery of death, would drive away corruption into revival. Souls and bodies would be raised to divine and life-giving intelligences by the Holy Spirit, the administrator, through knowledge, faith, and love.
Thus, the angel replied to Mary and said to her:
"The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you" Luke 1:35.
These two in motion, which are the Word and the Holy Spirit, came so that Mary would be pregnant, so that flesh would be built from flesh, the temple and dwelling place of God.
The Holy Spirit indeed by power in motion, for the beginning of movement of generation; but the power of the Most High itself is the Word.
For the power and wisdom of God is the Word, Jesus First Corinthians 1:24.
But concerning the Word, that is, the Son, he said, it will overshadow you.
For the perfect, divine, and splendid as it is clear cannot be comprehended by human nature.
And this means: And the Word became flesh John 1:14.
Rather, it signifies overshadowing, as it is said: He emptied himself Philippians 2:7.
We therefore have, according to the order previously mentioned, God and the Father, and the Son consubstantial, and consubstantial according to identity in substance.
For the Spirit is one substance, the very being itself.
But being itself is life and understanding.
These three in each, and therefore one divinity and one; for all is one God, because one Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: according to power and action, only apparent in otherness.
For God moves and commands all in power and in hidden motion, as in silence; but the Word, the Son, who is the Holy Spirit, converses in voice to generate all things according to life and understanding, substituting, to that which is being for all.
From these, it appears, the Word itself and the Holy Spirit are mind and wisdom.
For Paul also said this divinely: Who has known the mind of the Lord? Romans 11:34.
And again about him: The power and wisdom of God First Corinthians 1:24.
Solomon also speaks of wisdom about him, and many names are referred to the Son, and Paul speaks of him and substance to the Hebrews: the image of his substance Hebrews 1:3.
And again, Jeremiah spoke of consubstantial people: Who has stood in my substance, and seen my Word Jeremiah 23:18, according to the Septuagint.
And again: If they had stood in my substance, and had heard my words Jeremiah 23:22.
And the Gospel according to Matthew: Give us today our daily bread Matthew 6:11.
In the parable, Luke: The younger son said to the father: Give me the portion of substance that is due to me Luke 15:12.
And again: There he wasted his substance Luke 15:13.
For what comes down from there, did not hold onto its powers.
These belong to the soul, but I said this against those who deny that the name of substance is placed in the sacred Scriptures.
Moreover, God made the soul, that is, man, in his image and likeness.
What these things truly mean, listen as I say: The highest mind, and perfect wisdom, that is, the universal Word, was the same in eternal motion, circular motion from the first point and at the highest peak of the circular motion existing near that point, the cyclic cause inseparably turned, as from the Father, and in the Father, existing with the Father, proceeding, existing together, and in the Father was the Son, and in the Son, the Father.
The first substance, and in substance already substance, spiritual substance according to the mind, generative and effective substance, the pre-principle of all intelligible and intellectual being, and soul, and all material substance in matter.
Therefore, if the first motion, life, I say, and understanding: these are indeed the perfect one and only.
Not only is this circular motion, but spherical, and more spherical, and truly in every way the perfect sphere.
To live and to understand, and if life itself is being and intelligence, and the highest points and the middle are in each, so is intelligence. Therefore, one of these three is in itself circular and participating with each other. But more existing together without any interval, it is a sphere and the first, and perfect, and itself alone a sphere. But others are more like a spherical resemblance.
From this reasoning necessarily, a point is power, and a line, and a line working as a point: and going out from itself, and not always going out, in staying, and in moving simultaneously, always together, circulating around itself in a circle, being a sphere with God existing everywhere.
For since it is a point from which, and to which all motion is returned by conversion, this is God, the whole word, the whole mind, the whole wisdom, the omnipotent substance, the substance whom we revere, whom we worship, seeing only with the Spirit, raised to him by his will and grace of the cross, by the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ: Amen.
With the motion raised cyclically, I say straight, that from point to point, that is from Father to Father in the appearance of this motion and of all divinity, and the word, and the image of the Son exists by the command of God according to the image and likeness of God, the image of the image, that is, of the Son. For the Son is the image of the Father, as has been demonstrated. But this is because the Son is life, therefore the image of life has become the soul, and the soul with its mind, from him who is mind, is the power of intellectual life, not mind itself, but looking to the mind as if it is mind.
For vision there is unity, but turning downwards, and turned away from the mind, it drags itself and its mind downwards. Made only understanding, no longer as intelligible, but if it persists thus, it is the mother of those things above the sky, light, not true light, and indeed with its own mind light. But if it looks to the lower, being wanton, it becomes the power of giving life, which it will make to live in the world, and those things in the world down to the stone of stones, itself also made with mind.
For indeed, when the word is soul, not the word; and when in the midst of spirits, and intelligibles, and of matter, turned with its own mind to both, it becomes either divine or incorporated. For to its own understanding is its license, and by deprivation of true light it is again called back because of the thin spark of its own mind; for it is alone, but darkened it is said to be downwards. For indeed, the highest points of matter having the purer power of animating, are a cause to light as if it descended in itself.
Why then is it said: it distinguishes this, someone says, if such is the soul. How is it said: Let us make man in our image and likeness? Genesis 1:26.
We must first look at what man is, then what an image is, and what differs the image from the likeness, and how man is made according to the image and likeness, not image and likeness made: and what it is, to our image. For man is understood in two ways, as is customary, from body and soul. Some think from body and triple soul: others from body and soul having three powers. Some again say from body and divisible mind, and soul and spirit, by which the flowing body consists. Still others from the four-element body of four powers and the double soul, and double mind.
My understanding is this: for the body, as demonstrated: for God took dust and formed Adam, that is, already made earth, we have the highest points of the earth and the flower as the principles of the body. The Gospel according to Matthew and Luke declares a twin mind, a twin soul. For they say: So will be the presence of the son of man. Then two will be in the field: one will be taken, and one left; two women grinding at the mill, one will be taken, and one left. Matthew 24:40-41. Luke also added about the body two, that night two will be in one bed, one will be taken, and the other left. Luke 17:34.
Therefore, because in the field, the word is two, or mind and heavenly word, and another material. And the two grinding are two souls, heavenly and material: and one will be taken.
Heavenly mind or heavenly word: soul, but the hylic word and soul will be left behind.
How is this? Listen. Man must be made of soul and body. From the body, which is composed of earth, he has a hylic soul made of earth. Adam was made, according to the body, an animal, just like an animal is made of water and earth. Other animals have a living soul, but Adam was not so, for God breathed into his face all the sensible power, to which the mind is present in the discernment of senses. Therefore, another, more divine soul with its mind; for the sensible power, the hylic mind is implanted and consubstantial with the hylic. If therefore this is the case, the heavenly Word, that is, the mind or divine Spirit, is in the divine soul. But the divine soul is in the hylic spirit, the hylic spirit is in the hylic soul, and the hylic soul is in the carnal body, which must be purified with all three, so that it may receive eternal light and eternal life. This is accomplished through faith in Christ.
Let us therefore say how such a soul became according to the image of God and according to the likeness, and if only the soul is man, as Paul says: one is earthly, one is animal, one is spiritual, and all these are in one man. But he often speaks of the inner man, thus the soul: for it gathers the mind and the divine soul. He calls the heavenly man the remaining earthly man. If this is the case, our soul is in the image of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. If Christ is life and Word, he is the image of God in which the Father God is seen. This is what God is to be in life: this is indeed the image as it was said. And if Christ is life, which is to live, this is the Word itself indeed life. This is what it is to be, this indeed what it is to be, the Father is. And if again the life itself is what understanding is: that indeed is the Holy Spirit, and these three are all; and in each one three, and one three and altogether consubstantial.
If therefore the soul, according to what the soul is, and the soul's being is, and to live and understand is: thus the soul is of the higher Trinity, as the image of the image. For it is according to what the soul is in what it is to be, and giving life, and understanding, having understanding together before, consubstantial in one, and each is as its own substance, not by division, not by separation, not by diffusion, nor by extension, nor by cutting birth, but the eternal three: one being in another being, and these substantially; therefore according to the image. And as the Father is to be, the Son indeed two, but in motion and in act; thus the soul in what it is the soul, as a fatherly power: vivification and understanding in motion. Therefore this being of the soul according to the image of the Father and the Son: thus indeed being according to the likeness, consubstantial therefore also in its unity, and similar substance: in triple power, generating itself, therefore moving itself, and always in motion in the world of motions, the source and principle, as the father and son of its soul's motion and creator, and pre-cause and pre-principle.
I still say in secret a great mystery: as the more divine Trinity is one, according to what it radiantly made the soul in the intelligible world into substance and its own substance, which we properly call substance: thus the second soul's trinity explained imagination in the sensible world, the same soul always being above generating worldly souls, and this therefore according to the image and likeness. Let us see therefore if even according to the flesh indeed, and according to the flesh they say before divination, because it was to be that Jesus would take on flesh. But I say perhaps if even in this that the Word, and the flesh is the Word, and God and bodily, and above all body is said: for the power of all and everything is God, not in vain according to the image of the body. For if it is to be that our body and flesh will rise and take on incorruption, and become spiritual flesh, just as our Savior was in everything and was, and rose, and ascended, and it is to be that he will come: and if after the resurrection it will be transformed, receiving the spiritual garment, nothing prevents it according to the image of the higher flesh.
The Word was made human. For this, the Prophet says in testimony:
And God made man in the image of God.
Genesis 1:27.
If God made man according to the image, the Father according to the Son's image:
if, however, it is said,
He made them male and female, as has been previously stated,
He made man in the image of God;
It is clear that both physically and mystically, the Word was present in male and female:
for He Himself was the Son to Himself, in the first and second birth, both spiritually and physically.
Thanks be to God the Father, and to His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, from eternity to all ages of ages.
Amen.
Book Two
We all acknowledge Almighty God, and now we confess Christ Jesus. Soon, however, everyone will confess, those who have faith in Christ the Son.
About both, that they are both, and individually: indeed, just as the Father is God, Jesus Christ is the Son. Our whole religion and all our hope are in Him, and in this faith.
But when we confess them individually as two, we still say one God, and both as one God, because the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father.
Others say that the Father alone is one God, while the Son is a man, but let's leave them aside for now. For when we say Jesus is the Son, we confess He was the Son even before He was born of Mary.
For if, as John 1:1-3 states, in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and this was in the beginning, when later the Word became flesh, it's the same to say the Word and Jesus.
For if in the beginning was the Word, in the beginning was the Son, who later in the flesh is Jesus, because of the mystery that He fulfilled by the Father's command.
Thus, we must confess that from the beginning, He was the Son.
Do we say He is from the Father's substance or outside it? But this needs to be looked into.
Do we not confess that God exists? We do. So do we say that this existence is without substance or with substance?
Without substance, they say. I accept that, but I ask, without substance, how, as one who is not at all substance? Or as one who is above substance, that is, super-substantial?
Who would say that God, who exists, is without substance? For to Him, His substance is not known to us but is what He is, His being itself, not from substance but as substance itself, the parent of all things, granting existence to Himself, the first substance, the universal substance, the substance before all substances.
Therefore, because He is super-substantial, He is called without substance by some, not because He is without substance, since He is.
Let us therefore venerate God and say He exists, that is, with substance, who constituted all things: heaven and earth, the world, spirits, angels, souls, animals, and man in the image and likeness of their image.
So what is it, then, if He exists with substance? Surely, He is called God the Father, so we confess, and the Father of the Only Begotten: this is the faith of all.
Does the Word then deceive the understanding with its ambiguity? For He begot you, and of men, God said: so if He signifies begetting and creating, as a creature, and naturally begotten from My substance.
What more for the only begotten? What for Him who is the Son? What for Him who is one and only? What for Him in whom the Father is? What for Him who is in the Father?
What for Him who is the Word, who was in the beginning, and was with God, and is God, and through whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made, as John 1:1-3 states?
What does it mean, then, that Christ is the only begotten? For if God is the Father of all according to creation, how is He the Father of this only begotten if not in another way and from substance, not from nothing?
But there was no other substance before all than the Father's: therefore, Christ is from the Father's substance.
Come: now we confess the existence of Christ. Let's ask in the same way, is this existence with substance or without substance?
It was already said above that it cannot be without substance if it exists. So what is it? Where does this existence come from; from the non-substantial, or from the substantial, that is, from that which is being, or from that which is not being?
God, as they say, is being: Christ also is being, but He began nonetheless. This is true. But this existence that began, started from that which was somehow being, just as all divine things, and originated from divines, are always and have always been powerful: their process, however, is an act, and manifestation from movement, and indeed a birth.
For what is born of God, when God is unbegotten? Or is that credible, or is it right to say, that Christ, whom we call God's Son, was born from nothing?
Who is the Lord of Majesty; and other things we said above and in other books. Indeed, this is the final heresy that says either that Christ began from Mary, or that He did not put on flesh as the Word, but assumed a man, so that the Word Himself would govern him, and this is Marcellus: but above, it was Photinus.
Let us therefore exclude all those who think these and similar things about Christ: let us speak with those who say Christ is the Son of God, and the born Son, as we confess.
Only begotten, indeed begotten, not made. That’s not enough. They add, from the Father the Son, from God, God, from true light, true light, and also consequently from the Spirit, Spirit, and in the Father the Son, and in the Son the Father. They admit these things not by reason, but rather out of fear than truth. Some deny that substance should be mentioned here, others mention it, but they want to say it is similar, not the same.
They should first understand what the prophet Isaiah said:
No God was before me, and no one will be similar to me after me.
If the Son is Christ, of course after God, Christ; but no one similar to Christ after God. Therefore not similar to God, or if not after God, certainly with God, for there is no way it can be consubstantial. And David thus:
No one is like you.
Then, what we have taught many times, substance in what it is as substance, especially if it is of the same kind, and this is in two or more, this same is not called similar substance; as the soul is substance, though there are many souls, in what they are as souls, it is one and the same substance. Not that the substance preceded and preexisted, but always existed simultaneously, thus in other things. How much more in God? Since He is the origin of substance, with whom the Son by divine birth received substance from the Father, always with Him, and in Him, so that they are other and the same of the same substance, with no diminution of the former, nor reception of the latter, in a consubstantial completeness in unity God and His power always who has been, and always existed, that is God and Logos, God and His form, Father and Son, God and Jesus Christ, God and power and wisdom, consubstantial; therefore if this is said as consubstantial, when they exist together in the same form, of the same time and age. But here consubstantial means of the same substance together and substance without composition or division, but always simultaneously as distinct in their powers and actions.
Here questions arise: First, that in the sacred Scriptures mention of substance is not made, and especially consubstantial is not read. Another, that if this is so, the Father suffered with the Son. Third, that if this is so, neither the Father is greater, nor the Son lesser, nor one sending, the other sent. And these and similar things. So first let’s see about substance: there is no substance in God, nor in Christ: Is it not read? If it is not, as we said above: because it is not at all, we accept it this way; or because it is entirely above substance, it would be blasphemy to say God is not to us: for substance is what God is, what spirit is, what light is. Why then do we add true light? For in divine things, and in God we will accept substance this way, as in material bodies, and in corporal things the soul. For this is the substance there, to be above substance: all confess God to be since He is the power of substance, and therefore above substance and thus substance: for power contains being. Certainly God is omnipotent, and of whom is the origin or cause, He is all in power indeed and in a certain way, hence it is said by Paul:
So that God may be all in all.
Therefore He is being, and existing, and substance, who is all since He is the parent of all, therefore He is all in power. Therefore it should not be doubted to say the substance of God: because when we fall short of the first or highest proper words, we suitably adapt what may fit our understanding here, that what is, to God being, we rightly call substance. In the same way, we should accept Christ to be substance, and from His Father as substance, since He is also light from light, God from God, Spirit, Logos through whom all things were made. And since it is so, that He willed to come down to the mystery of the body with His substance, of which it is said by the Apostle:
For in Him dwells all the fullness of the Deity bodily which is substantially; for God is power, and Logos is action, in either both: for power contains what can be
That is, it can be. Therefore, the very power is action, and the action itself is power. Thus, both the Father acts and the Son acts, and the Father acts: therefore, the Father, because power generates action, and therefore the Son is action; because action comes from power: thus, the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, but both are in each other, and therefore they are one.
However, they are two, because the more there is, the other appears: the Father has more power, and the Son is more action; and therefore, because action is more, action is more because it is an outward action. If this is so, both the Father and the Son are substance, and one substance, and substance from the Father, and substance together, and always and eternally together the Father and the Son, the same and together substance, that is, ὁμοούσιον (homoousion). Has this not been read in the Holy Scriptures?
First, whoever denies this admits the matter but seeks the authority of Scripture. How is it not unjust to not admit the matter because the elders perhaps omitted it by some chance or cause, when you can be rationally convinced? But do they deny what has been read about substance? Or about the substance of God and Christ? Or about ὁμοούσιον itself? The substance of God and Christ has been read. The substance of God has been read in the prophet Jeremiah Jeremiah 28:18 according to the Septuagint: Who stood in the substance of the Lord, and saw his word? Who gave ear and heard? Again, shortly after 22: And if they had stood in my substance, and had heard my words. Again, substance is read in the prophet David Psalm 138:15: And my substance was not hidden from you when I was made in secret and skillfully wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. It is read about Christ in Paul’s letter to the Hebrews Hebrews 1:3: Who is the brightness of his glory and the express image of his substance. There are other examples, but I think these are sufficient.
But among the Greeks, ὑπόστασις (hypostasis) is used, not οὐσία (ousia). Let us see what the difference is. The Greeks call both things that are eternal and things that are in the world and earthly beings: in the eternal, God is almighty, the cause of all things, and the source and origin of all that exists, that is, of all beings. What then do we give to God? That which is being, or do we give being to all, I give, do we not give? Indeed, reason holds that the first being is God. But because being can be understood as not clearly what that being is, if it is already comprehensible, it is called ὂν (on), that is, a form coming into knowledge, which being is already called ὂν and ὕπαρξις (hyparxis); every ὕπαρξις has what is being; but being is not immediately also ὕπαρξις, nor ὂν, unless potentially, not manifestly as to be called ὂν; for ὂν is a certain formed figure of what is being, which, however, is purely understood as pure when it is already understood as formed: for a form generates intellect, clearly pronouncing that form is one thing, and what is formed is another. But what is formed, this is being: the form, however, is what makes what is being understood. Therefore, what is being, we give to God, and form to Christ, because the Father is known through the Son, that is, through the form, which is being; and it was said here John 14:9: Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. Therefore, both God is ὕπαρξις, and Christ is ὕπαρξις; for ὕπαρξις with form is what is being, and since they are always together, and form is being, and being itself is form, hence the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father: for being is in the Father, which is power, which is prior to what form is. It is again also in the Son being; but this being has its own from the Father, to be for him form being; therefore the one is in the other, and both are one. Therefore, God is ὂν, the Son is ὂν, that is, being with form: for everything that is ὂν being, is with form: this is also called existence, substance, and subsistence, for what is ὂν is, and exists, and is subject.
This, however, is what being is without any connection, which is simple, which is one; therefore more manifestly it is subsistence, and it is existence, and it is called substance. If, therefore, it is called subsistence of God, more it is called substance of God, and more this, because it signifies subject, and the principal which is fitting to God. Let it not be, however, subject as in the worldly substance, but what is more honorable and ancient and according to the source of the universe. But what is being, which God grants to those that are, so that...
Let everything be of the same essence; therefore, having form, and first being the only true: because what is pure being is more substance.
And since, again, form is being, and it itself is substance, this is called hypostasis: for indeed, being formed is substance, being formed is God, which is God, and the Father, so also the Son, which is the Word and Son. Therefore, subsistence is properly said of both, which is substance: because what is the principal being, with form, is called substance. This is also called substance, and thus it was said that from one substance there are three subsistences, so that what is being itself subsists in three ways: God himself, and Christ, that is, the Word and the Holy Spirit.
Hypostasis is rightly attributed to God, rightly to the Word, that is, to the Father and the Son. But the Latins call this substance, because we said that it can also be called substance, namely, what is being, more formed being. Therefore, when read hypostasis, this is essence, as we have proven. Now let us see whether in that place, where we read, it means something else, hypostasis than essence. For many think that wealth and fortunes are signified by this word, hypostasis namely; but if he said: If they had stood in the hypostasis of the Lord, they would have seen His Word (Jeremiah 23:22, according to the Septuagint). What do we understand here by the hypostasis of the Lord, if not that which is God? But God is spirit, light, power, almighty, and such things.
Here, the one who stands and understands, but was not understanding, stands therefore: however, understanding God understands and sees the Word of God, the Son; it is clear, therefore, that this is the hypostasis of God, because understood and the Word is understood, for they are together, and this is of the same essence.
He says this again: Because if they had stood in my hypostasis, and heard my word. Above to see; here, however, he placed both, that is, in order to understand. For the one who understands the matter, stands in the substance of the matter, that is, at the first source of the matter, so that he may understand all things that are of it. What then? When elsewhere either in David, or in the Gospel hypostasis is placed and read, does it mean anything other than essence? My hypostasis, says David (Psalm 138:15): about God indeed, My hypostasis in the lower parts of the earth. For he says: let no one believe himself hidden, because indeed I am and all that I am and my substance, and in the lower parts of the earth; for God is everywhere, or the spirit of God, which is the substance of God.
I also want to see that in the Gospel, placed through parable and example. For the head of a family said to his two sons, he divided his hypostasis (Luke 15:12); certainly, we understand fortunes and inheritance. But if this is to be referred to God, it will be hypostasis here too, all power and virtue. One son consumes this who departs from God: for indeed, who wanders from God, neither has the spirit of God, nor light, nor Christ, he consumes the substance of God within himself. For this is the hypostasis of God, as we have said; whether now we call it wealth here, or inheritance, it makes no difference: for thus it was said by the apostle Paul: Oh, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! (Romans 11:33). If therefore, the riches of God are wisdom and knowledge: and if wisdom and knowledge itself is the power of God, but the power of God is Christ, and Christ is the Word; the Word is truly the Son, and the Son is in the Father: therefore he himself is the riches of the Father; he himself is the hypostasis.
Therefore, it no longer matters, whether we understand hypostasis as riches, or essence, as long as it signifies that by which God is himself. Therefore, it is read of God either hypostasis or essence: this is also understood of Christ. It is said: I am in the Father, and the Father is in me (John 14:10). Which indeed is said twice for this reason, because the Son could be in the Father, not however, also the Father in the Son, but so that fullness and the same one in each might be. But if it is the same hypostasis, it is therefore of the same essence. But the same: for Christ is God of God, and light of light. Therefore, of the same essence. But if this is from eternity and always necessarily together, therefore truly of the same essence. But indeed, this very thing of the same essence is read.
For all that we have said is read: I tell you, who already fa...
You talk about God, either what light is or what spirit is. So you say God from God, Spirit from the invisible Spirit, and true light from true light, which are the hypostases of God. But when you say Christ, God from God, light from light, and such things: where did you read this? Or is it allowed for you to say such things, from which homoousion is more proven, and we are not allowed to learn homoousion? But if you say light from light because God is called light, and Christ is called light, and likewise the Father is God, and Christ is called God; indeed, it is obvious, but not read in the scriptures, light from light; but it was allowed to take. Therefore, it is allowed to compose non-read things from read things. You deny that homoousion is read; but if some similar things, or similarly named things are read, we must equally accept this named thing. God's essence is light, this light is life, and this life, this intelligence, this being God, this being Christ is sufficiently declared. The Father lives, and I live (John 6:58). The Father has life in Himself, and has given the Son to have life in Himself (John 5:26). All that the Father has, He has given to me (John 16:15). With these and other things, we often prove that the same are in the Father and in the Son, and that always and from eternity: and therefore it is called homoousion.
But where does this word come from? Listen to the Gospel, listen to Paul the Apostle, listen to the prayer of the offering, because God is life; and eternal life. We Christians, that is, those who believe in Christ, are taught in the Gospel (Matthew 6:9) how we should pray to God the Father, in which prayer we ask for many things, as well as for bread, which is life (as it is said (John 6:59): This is the bread that came down from heaven). This life of both Christ and God, that is, eternal life which is named itself, epiousios bread, from the same essence bread, that is, from the life of God: consubstantial life. For how will we be children of God, except by participation in eternal life? which Christ bringing from the Father gave to us. Therefore, this is (Luke 11:3), give us our epiousios bread, that is, life from the same substance, for if what we receive is the body of Christ, and Christ Himself is life, we seek epiousios bread, for the riches dwell in Christ bodily; the Greek Gospel therefore has epiousios, which is named from substance, and assuredly the substance of God: this the Latins either not understanding or not able to express could not say, and only put daily, not epiousios. Therefore, both the name is read, and in God the substance, and it can be said in Greek even if not expressed in Latin; it is still said in Greek because it is understood. Therefore, we who believe in Christ, because we hope for eternal life from Him, because He is life, when we follow Him, and with Him, and around Him, and around eternal life we are, and we are called a periousios people. Hence the holy Apostle in the Epistle to Titus said in Greek (Titus 2:14): To redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. The Latin, not understanding periousios crowd, periousios, the one around, that is, around the life which Christ both has and gives, put abundant people. What merit is there for the people to be saved by which they abound? This, however, is again a great cause and as if a necessity, hence periousios. Hence the prayer of the offering in the same understanding prays to him: save the periousios people, zealous of good works. Therefore, all things are read, named from the essence hence composed homoousion of God and Christ, which is not alien to reason: for it has the substance, which the previous names have, and it is named in the same way: and this name excludes all heretics; therefore it was necessarily placed by the elders. Therefore, it must be said and always discussed.
But indeed because it is not understood, and it causes scandal, it must be removed both from faith and discussion, or certainly put in Latin: it is not understood, they say. Therefore, it cannot be said in Latin either. It is not understood, why do you fear it? for those who oppose it, still fear it: if you fear it; you are heretics, you wish to enter with this excluded. If you deny the substance in God, do you wish to remove homoousion therefore, because they confess the substance? Therefore, intelli
Are you afraid? But if Basil also says "homoousion," and this name is offensive to you, then you reject it because you deny the essence in God.
If, however, you reject it because you understand it, Basil himself also understands who wants "homoousion" to be said, of which we will speak later. "Homoousion" is not a name that is not understood.
They say, let it be said in Latin. Because it is difficult to say, you desire it; and if it is said, you follow. A great miracle! A word makes you heretics, or rather the sound of the word, which is said in Greek.
Then if I say it in Latin, since the Church has Greeks, and because all scripture, both Old and New Testament, was written in Greek and Latin, if we do not use Greek, when questioned by the Greeks, what will we answer?
It is necessary to say "homoousion"; therefore it must be used. What then? Are there not many names in the Scriptures, either Greek or Hebrew, either interpreted or not interpreted?
As in Matthew chapter 27, verse 46: "Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani." Also Golgotha and Emmanuel. Also in First Corinthians chapter 16, verse 22: "If anyone does not love our Lord Christ, let him be anathema." Six hundred others, either interpreted, yet used; or not interpreted, and simply used; or anathema, which is not expressed, neither in Latin nor in Greek, and yet it is used daily, as well as Hallelujah and Amen, which are said unchangeably in every language.
Therefore, it is allowed to use "homoousion" in the same way. Surely a word must be removed, either because it is obscure, or because it is contrary, or because it expresses less or more, or because it is superfluous.
This is not obscure; for we have already said what it signifies; and you, because you understand it, are afraid: and Basil, because he understands it, changes it. However, it is not contrary, since we all acknowledge the substance: for God is substance, Spirit, light; which are said of God the Father and Christ. This word "homoousion," since it is said of the substance, cannot be contrary.
But it is expressed less or more. It should be corrected rather than removed. But how is it superfluous? Because it has already been said, where it has been said: or because it is not useful, which especially excludes the heretics, especially the Arians? Which was established by the elders as a wall and a bulwark? But it was established recently. Because a venomous cohort of heretics erupted recently, for which it was established according to the old faith, for even before the discussion, many bishops of the world, three hundred fifteen in the city of Nicaea, sent the decreed faith throughout the world, and thousands of bishops of that time or of subsequent years held the same faith. It was also approved by the Emperor, the father of our Emperor.
But we want this to be said in Latin: neither will this be denied to you, you who deny the substance in God and are defeated by Basil, and you, Basil, who confess the substance, both of you confess "homoousion" with your own words.
Indeed, you say God, and you also say light, the same spirit. Whoever says these things, says the substance of God. For whoever says Father or Almighty, or good, or infinite and such things, does not say the substance, but the quality. Likewise, you say the Son is the Word, light, spirit; and these signify the substance. Again, when you say God, you say God from God, true light from true light: you remove Basil's argument of fear, lest there be a superior substance, from which there are two. For if God is from God, and light from light, surely the substance of the Father is of the Son: because the Father Himself is God, He Himself is the substance, from which the Son is the Word, light, spirit: for when the Son is said, also Savior, also Jesus Christ, it is said according to quality, not according to substance.
Thus the rest are either attributed to the Father or to the Son, therefore you confess the substance. But surely you believe Basil, who says the same things about God and Christ; light is God: spirit, word, and he confesses the substance. But indeed, in these "homoousion" is not: it is so, if you do not understand the same substance in "homoousion." But if the word is composed, the same is signified in two or more as "homoiousios," which is the same in kind: and "homilous," which is the same in age, and as "homonymous," which has the same name, concord in harmony, with the same heart, the same.
νοία· therefore, consubstantial means that it is the same substance.
But if ὁμοῦ is understood, it will be homoousion,
in Latin, simultaneously consubstantial, not from something else, but by God's power from eternity.
For if (John 1:1) In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, since the beginning has nothing before it: for if it had, it would cease to be the beginning: from eternity God, and from eternity the Word.
Therefore, both together, and always together, and never one without the other, nor the Son from what is not at some time.
Here, therefore, Arius is excluded, who said sometimes not being;
his opinion was also that the Son is from what is not, that is, from nothing.
homoousion means to be simultaneously, and substance:
Against both sacrileges the power of this word repels, by which homoousion is said:
for if it is so, that homoousion means of the same substance, as we taught above, it excludes what was said, that Christ is from nothing:
for if God and the Word are of the same substance, God and the Word are not only not from nothing, but not even from a similar substance.
But if homoousion from what is, is understood to be substance simultaneously, this means the substance is simultaneous, simultaneously God and the Word, and from eternity always simultaneously Father and Son.
11. From this it is excluded what was said: there was a time when he was not.
If this is so, by this alone, that is, ὁμοούσιος, all the poison of the Arian doctrine is destroyed.
O learned bishops! O holy ones! O those confirming faith by the spirit!
O word, truly the word of God! which God and the Word are shown to be, simultaneously from eternity, and always of the same substance.
Therefore, in Latin, it is said homoousion; hence necessarily it must also be set forth and treated in Greek.
But let us also add something now, by which through your confession and through divine reading it may be proved in Latin that homoousion is approved.
Divine reading says: the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father.
And lest it be insufficient for faith, our Lord Jesus Christ himself says (John 14:10): I am in the Father and the Father in me.
What then?
Do these names exist in each other? or the powers, or the substances, or the wisdom and powers?
The Father, as Father, cannot be in the Son.
Likewise, the Son cannot be in the Father, but as the substance of power is, this means, in the other.
Therefore one is in the other: one is rendered even with each subsisting; yet one, because the same is understood and named in both.
Therefore, both the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father.
But in this way.
If this is so, let’s look at the rest.
You say, and you rightly say: Jesus Christ our Lord, God from God, and light from light.
It is close to say similarly this too.
Let us say, therefore, and truly say in God, light in light.
For indeed it is not said in return, because one word is in two.
For the Father and the Son are two names, and therefore they can be exchanged, so that the Father is said in the Son, and the Son in the Father.
But truly, when one name is said in two, God in God, it will be said in the same way also when it is said of the other, the same reason is when it is said light in light.
Therefore by necessity of one name it is said once, but because of the two, Father and Son, it is both understood and heard twice.
Let us say therefore Jesus the Son of God, God from God, light from light.
Let us also say that, God in God, light in light.
For if, as we all confess, the Son is in the Father and the Father in the Son, and the Father is God, and light, then necessarily and truly it is to say: both God in God, and light in light.
Is it hard to say that? but it must be confessed that it is so and so it is.
12. What if it is also read, and from these two one is very clearly stated, so that it is not invented by me, but it is already proved by sacred reading?
The hymn writer David in the Book of Psalms, which is called the key of all mysteries, sings to God thus (Psalm 36:9): For with You is the fountain of life; in Your light we see light:
Do we think it is said to God, or to Christ? or to both?
Because it is rightly to whomever: for in the Father the Son, and in the Son the Father.
But if to God the Father, this will be that (Jeremiah 23:22 according to the Septuagint): If they had stood in my substance, and ver.
My people would have heard me.
But if it is about the Son, this will be what is written in John 14:9: "Whoever has seen me has seen the Father."
Therefore, in your light, we will see the light.
So, there is light, in your light, we will see the light.
There is no doubt when this follows, since that which is in the same way, both in reality and in reading, is proven.
If this is so, let's gather everything: now the concept of homoousion will appear, both understood in Greek and pronounced in Latin.
We believe in God the Father Almighty, and in his only-begotten Son.
Truly, let it be so: That's enough about this.
Isaiah said thus in Isaiah 45:14: "Egypt labored, and the merchandise of Ethiopia and the Sabeans.
Tall men will walk in you, and they will be your servants, and they will follow you, bound in chains they will worship you, and they will plead with you, for God is in you, and there is no other God besides you."
Jesus Christ our Lord, God from God, light from light: consubstantial, of the same substance.
Thus the rest follow in the creeds, and the faith is explicit and complete, and the concept of homoousion is full, and of the same substance, and in the same substance, and always together.
If it pleases, let it be held so in Latin.
But if one Greek word, which with great expression and great brevity concludes both, pleases to remain, let it persist about God and our Lord; homoousion indeed should be held more and more, written, spoken, discussed, and preached in all Churches.
For this is the faith at Nicaea, this is the faith of the apostles, this is the catholic faith.
Hence, the Arians, hence all heretics are defeated.
Peace be with those who think thus, from God the Father and from Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
Book Three
LOGOS, or divine reason, uses itself as its seat and also as its body, a celestial soul. But it uses a sensual mind, or LOGOS, for an insensible soul, just as the sensual part is in the body, and therefore in any kind of body. Everything that comes from the divine returns to its own kind, as if it were a part of them, but as an image, as has been asserted and proven elsewhere. For within the divine itself, the Word of God is an image. Thus, all other things are images of the divine. Just as the Word of God is an image, every soul of this kind is an image of the Word, and other things are images too. But in the sensual nature, they are not images but rather simulacra and imitations because the progression of things is such that the radiance of light is an image of light. Hence, the substance is the same in the highest and eternal things because the image of light is light. Just as from Spirit comes only Spirit, and from truth, truth, and from God, God, so from substance comes substance. For Spirit, truth, and God are substance. Everything that exists has its own being as substance. But this being that we speak of must be understood differently in what it is to be: one is the being of substance, another of quality. But these distinctions apply to sensible things and the world. In the divine and eternal, these two are one. For everything there is simple, and this is God, which is light, which is the best, which is existence, which is life, which is intelligence. We have spoken of this in other contexts as well. Everything there is simple in substance, unconnected, one with number, not one with number, but before number one. That is, before one exists in number, it is plainly simple, alone without imagination, which is the other. Hence, what is born from it is an image, not a division or effusion, but a radiance. Not an extension, but an appearance. Not a germination of potential, but an action of potential. For where there is action, or whence, if not in potential and from potential? And when or where is potential, if not with action and in action? Therefore, nothing is in another, nor is it ever similar, because it is always the same. And because radiance is declared as light, or action is declared as potential. Thus (John 14:9): Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. And because no one sees potential itself alone (John 1:18): No one has ever seen God. And because ceasing potential is life, and ceasing intelligence, but this life and intelligence are action. If anyone sees God, it is necessary to die, because God's life and intelligence are in themselves, not in action. But all action is external; this is our living, which is to live externally. Therefore, it is death to see God (Exodus 33:20): No one, he says, has ever seen God and lived, for like is seen by like. Therefore, we must abandon external life, abandon intelligence, if we wish to see God, and this is death for us.
But since this life and intelligence are LOGOS, who is Christ, through Christ, and us all things. Through him, therefore, is LOGOS, and life, and intelligence. Why? Because all these are motion and addition. Therefore we, if we are in Christ the Lord, see through Christ, that is, the true life. This is, through the true image. And because it is true, therefore it is of the same substance, because in action there is potential. Therefore there we see God, and hence that (John 14:9): Whoever has seen me has seen God. And because action comes from potential, therefore the Son comes from the Father, and LOGOS from the Spirit. And because Spirit comes from Spirit, therefore God comes from God. Therefore, from the same substance comes the same substance, as we have taught above. Potential is God, that is, what is the first universal existence, which has within itself, that is, in itself, life and intelligence. But more precisely, that which is existence, this is, which is life and intelligence through internal motion and turned in on itself. Therefore there is motion in God, and from this and action, whence it is said (John 5:19): Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing of his own accord, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever the Father does, that the Son does likewise. Therefore, both the Father acts and does, but internally, whence he needs nothing external, always full, always whole, always blessed. But since life and intelligence are motion, all life gives life, and everything that gives life is external.
It is, likewise, intelligence that understands outwardly, and that which understands inwardly, is drawn and lives from intelligence, either by shining forth or illuminating. Hence, from God and of the same substance is both substance, and life, and intelligence, and likewise movement when it is inwardly within itself, the same as substance: which, when it looks outwardly, and to project outwardly, that is, to work and act, this birth is, this is the nativity. And because movement is one, the only-begotten son, movement itself is either that life or intelligence. Indeed, life must be movement.
For all life gives life, hence movement is life, which either exists in itself, and turned within itself, is substance itself for itself; or looks outwardly, hence it is more called movement: for inwardly movement is cessation, or moved cessation, ceasing movement. For God must be the parent of both, I mean of cessation and movement, and that substance itself, which by a union and a certain form is the source of both, is simple and one, always one and alone, and, as we said above, whole. When it is received and understood in the ceasing movement, this is God, and he himself is the father, always and eternally father: because always movement from substance, and in substance, or rather substance itself, when it looks outwardly, this is looking outwardly, to be movement or motion: which itself is to see itself, to understand itself, and to want to know itself.
When it sees itself, it exists doubly and is understood as seeing, and that which is seen: he who sees, and that which is seen, because he sees himself: this is therefore looking outwardly, born or existing outwardly, to understand what it is. Therefore, if it is outward, and if born, it is the son: and if the son, the only-begotten, because alone, who is all action, and all and universal, and one movement, and the same movement and substance: therefore both father and son are one and the same substance: consubstantial therefore, that is, homoousion (homoousion).
Therefore all things are the son, just as all things are the father. But because substance is potentially prior to action and movement, I said prior in force and cause, because substance is the cause of movement: for all movement is in substance, therefore necessarily the father is the generator, and likewise necessarily all things that the father has, the son also has (John 16:15): "All things," he says, "that the Father has, he has given to me." And likewise (John 5:26): "For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself": therefore as the father, so the son is life, and life from himself. For it is life itself, which is the power of living to itself and others, not life from elsewhere. Therefore movement, and principal movement, and one movement, and movement from itself, and only-begotten movement: this is Logos; for indeed life is, through whom all things live. And because it is life, he is the one through whom all things were made, and through whom all things were made: because all things purified return to eternal life. And all things were made in him, because what was made in him is life: for nothing that exists has its being, from which life itself is being what it is.
Therefore all things were made in Christ, because Christ is Logos. But life neither began, because it always is from itself to itself, hence it never ceases, and is always infinite, and through all things, and in all things from the divine and from the supercelestial to the celestial, and all the heavens, the aether, the air, the humid and the earthly, and all things that arise from the earth, and all other things. Therefore, even our body and flesh have something vital, and all matter is animated, so that the world might exist, from which creatures burst forth by the command of God. Therefore in the flesh is life, that is, Logos; and in life is Christ: wherefore Logos was made flesh. Hence it is not surprising that by mystery he took flesh, so that he might assist both flesh and man, but when he took flesh, he took the universal Logos of the flesh: for therefore the power of all flesh triumphed in the flesh, and therefore he helped all flesh, as it is said in Isaiah (Isaiah 40:5; 52:10; Luke 3:6): "All flesh shall see the salvation of God." And in the book of Psalms (Psalm 65:3): "All flesh shall come to you." Likewise, he also took the universal Logos of the soul: for it is evident that he had a soul, when the same Savior said (Matthew 26:33): "My soul is sorrowful."
Even unto death. And likewise in
Psalm 16:10, "You will not abandon my soul to Hell."
That he would take the universal reason of the soul is evident in
Ezekiel 18:4: "All souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son."
Likewise, the universal reason of the soul is shown also by the fact that he gets angry, as when he curses the fig tree and says
(Matthew 10:15; 11:23): "It will be more bearable for Sodom and Gomorrah on the Day of Judgment than for you."
Similarly, in many places. Also, he desires, as he says
(Matthew 26:39): "Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me."
There he also reasons: "But let your will be done." These and many other things show the universal reason of the soul: thus, the whole man was assumed, and assumed and liberated: for in him all universals were present, universal flesh, universal soul, and they were lifted up and purified on the cross for the salvation of God, the universal reason of all universals: for through him all things were made, who is Jesus Christ, God and our Savior, and our Lord. Amen.
The reason, therefore, of what is, what can be, and what could have been, like a seed and the power of existing, the wisdom and virtue of all substances from God to all actions, God in the potential of the Father and in the act by which the Son himself is one God with the Father. For since these are living and intelligent existences, let us consider these three: being, living, understanding, thus being three, always one, and in that which is being. But in that which is being, I say, which is there to be: thus, in this being, this is living, this is understanding all substantially, and one in subsistence: for living itself is what being is; for in God, as in us, it is not one thing that lives and another thing that makes life.
For if we assume and accept that life itself is existence, and what power it has is existence for it, it becomes clear that we must accept being and living as one and the same: this is the reason, and the same power of intelligence is certainly in it. Therefore, this same understanding is what being is for it, and that being is what understanding is: this very understanding is intelligence: therefore, being, being of life and intelligence, is what life and intelligence are: one thing, then, is what life is, and the same being is what intelligence is.
If these are one in each singly and in pairs, it follows that living itself is what understanding is: for if being is living, and being is understanding; it becomes one to live and to understand, since for them being is one. Additionally, being itself is nothing other than living: for what does not live loses its being, so as long as something exists, it is its living, hence being ceases with life. But when we speak of eternal things, we accept another living: but this same knowing that you live, knowing furthermore is what understanding is: therefore, knowing is understanding, and knowing that you live, this is living: thus, understanding will be living.
If it is so, that living and understanding are one, and since being is one which is living and understanding; substance is one, subsistence are these three: for when they have their power and significance, and as they are said and are; necessarily they are three, and yet one, since everything that is single is one, these three are, and it is said so in Greek: "from one essence to be three subsistences." This being so, being is the foundation for the others: living and understanding as secondary and afterwards, as by nature they seem to be present in that which is being, or to have arisen from it in some way, and in that which is their being, they have preserved that first and fountain being: for it has been proven that there is never being without living and understanding: nor living and understanding without that which is being.
Let this be an example for the understanding of this matter. Let us assume vision or seeing by itself, by its power and nature potentially existing, this is its being, having the power of vision for seeing, which will be the right to see: and likewise having the power by seeing to discern each seen thing.
What does it mean to understand:
If these things are powerful, they are said to be nothing other than to exist.
They remain, and as they are calm and turned inward, they only operate by seeing, or by the act of seeing, existence, and therefore only to be counted as being.
But when the same vision begins to use the act of seeing, as if by its own progression, as I say, it does not progress, nor does it leave itself, but by the intention and vigor of its own power, which is living for it, everything that is encountered or seen by running into it, it functions with the duty of living, the life of the vision itself, which indicates living with an operative motion of vision, only in that it sees with a pure sense of seeing not discriminating, nor judging what it sees.
Which indeed we understand by estimation, that we might think to see only without intelligence: when, however, to see, which is to live for the vision, is not to see unless it grasps and comprehends what it has seen, therefore it is also to judge what it has seen: hence in seeing, there is judging: for if it has seen, however it has seen, it has judged that very thing, or what it has seen.
Therefore, as we say, in seeing there is judging: and in being a vision there is seeing: thus, in their simplicity and unity, vision, seeing, discerning; just as in discerning, there is seeing, and in seeing, there is being a vision, and, to speak truly, it is not in, but being vision, in it is seeing and discerning: thus in each, everything, or each one is everything, one.
So lift yourself up and rise, my spirit, and with the strength inspired in me by God, recognize that understanding God is difficult, but not hopeless: for He wanted to be known, and therefore He created the world and His divine works, so that we could see Him through all these things:
Certainly, the Word, His son, His image, His form, gave us the transition to understand the Father.
So in what nature, in what kind, in what power, in what might do we place, understand, and estimate God? Or by what fantasy of intelligence do we reach and advance toward Him? And when we say He is understandable, certainly by God's inspiration the soul is in us and from Him, which is the greatest part in us: we therefore touch Him with that by which we are from Him and depend on Him.
Certainly after the coming of the Savior, when we saw God Himself in the Savior, when we were taught and instructed by Him, when we received the Holy Spirit of understanding from Him, what else will such a great teacher of understanding give, but to know God, to recognize God, to confess God? And our ancestors asked what or who God was; and to these it was answered by Him who is always in His bosom (John 14:9, 10): You see me and seek my Father, I have been with you for a long time: whoever has seen me has seen the Father, I am in the Father, and the Father is in me. So what do we say?
God is Spirit, and Spirit is life: indeed it is said, the Father is life, and likewise Christ is Spirit. And He again said about Himself (John 5:6): I am life. And (John 5:26): As the Father has life in Himself, so has He given to the Son to have life in Himself. Likewise, the Holy Spirit is Spirit, certainly He is also life. For Christ received everything from the Father (John 17:7, 8, 10): And He said, I gave everything to Him. And also: What He has is mine. Therefore He has life, and life is from Himself.
Why is that? Because where there is life, there is life from Himself: and if this is so, there is understanding that He is life, and what it is to live: and what it is that life is: therefore all are united, and all are one and one substance, and truly consubstantial, or together, which is the same substance.
Therefore the Father is being; for this is the principle and first of all to the fantasy of the second: this God, He with the other two is God, this one God, because what is to live and understand, this itself is what is to be; and from these two, living and understanding, comes from what is being. Therefore, let no one separate the Holy Spirit, and with profane blasphemy, let no one suspect something unknown to be, because He too is from the Father.
Because He is also the Son, who is from the Father: for after that which is existence, that is being or substance, or in a higher sense which you ascend to with certain names, you may call it either existentiality or substantiality. It is called ὑπαρχότητα, οὐσιότητα, ὀντότητα. All these mean what I say, remaining in itself, enlivening with its own power, by which all things are enlivened and empowered, full, absolute, above all perfections in every way is divine perfection. This is God above mind, above truth, omnipotent in power, and therefore not a form; though mind and truth are a form, but not as an inherent inseparable form, rather as inseparably attached to the declaration of the power of God the Father, the same substance or image or form.
Thus, the first thing we said about being, which is God, is called silence, and rest and cessation. If so, the progression of power, which is not actually progression, but appearance; and if progression is not leaving where it proceeds from, but with connection progression, more accurately appearance: for there was nothing outside into which progression could occur. For God is everywhere, and everything is God: therefore, the progression of power existed as an act: if God is silence, then the Word is said: but if cessation, then it is motion: if essence, then it is life. As we have taught, in that which is being and living, in that which is silence is the silent Word, and in that which is rest or cessation there is either hidden motion or hidden action. Therefore necessarily from this cessation motion was born, and action was born, or from silence the Word, or from essence life. Therefore this essence, silence, cessation, is the Father, that is, God the Father. But life, the Word, motion or action, is the Son and the only Son; because nothing else but one, either life, or the Word, or motion or action, and more so all these are motion or action: for all those are active, life and the Word thrive in motion and operate in motion; however, the universal motion, which is the principal motion, arises from itself: for what is motion, if not motion from itself? For if it is moved by another, it is something other than motion, which is moved by another: and if that which moves this something, is not motion, it cannot move: for it will not have from where to move. But if motion is born from motion, then motion is born from itself.
But this is John 5:26: The Father gave Him life, so that life would be in Him. Therefore motion, and there is one motion, and motion from itself. And while it is partly hidden, hence this apparent motion from the Father is motion. And because it is motion from motion, therefore it is motion from itself, and one motion, hence the only Son. This Logos is universal in all things through whom all things were made. This is life to all, because all that were made live. This is also Jesus Christ, because He will save all to life. Therefore one motion, and one Son and only, because one life, and one life, and only eternal. Therefore the Son is of the same essence as the Father: for the Father is life, and the Son is life, which is essence: likewise the Father is motion, and the Son is motion which is essence, for there is nothing accidental; therefore the Word is the Father, though the silent Word, yet the Word, and the Word is the Son, and this is essence. For whatever is, or acts and operates is essence, and where more essence, the Word. Not as here the sounding air, the Word, but as something acting here, the Word. Therefore one Son, because one motion: one life, because one sole life which is eternal. For not life, which sometimes dies. It never dies, if it knows itself. But it cannot know itself, unless it knows God, and God who is life, and true life, and the fountain of life. If this is so, with God known, it will know all things: because from God all things, and in all things God, and God all things. This John proclaims John 17:3: This is eternal life, that they know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent. Knowledge is life. And further whether life, or knowledge, it is one motion, and the same motion acting life, and through life knowledge, and through knowledge life: therefore the same motion, fulfilling two offices, life and knowledge. But Logos is motion, and Logos is the Son. Therefore the only Son in that He is the Son; in that however...
Λόγος, the Word, is twofold. For He is both life and knowledge, working through the mystery of the cross for the salvation of souls. He is life because we were to be freed from death. He is knowledge through the mystery of the Holy Spirit because the Spirit was given, taught everyone, and bore witness about Christ. To know is to live, and through this, to know God, which means to have true life, and this is to bear witness about Christ.
Thus, the Son of God, Christ, that is, the Word, is both Son and life. And because He is also movement and knowledge, He is the Son in His work of being life, Jesus existing. In the work of knowledge, He is the Holy Spirit existing, so that there are two existences, Christ and the Holy Spirit, in one movement, which is the Son. And hence, from the Father, Jesus (Sirach 24:5): "I came forth from the mouth of the Most High," and the Holy Spirit also from the Father, because one movement brought both into existence. And because (John 16:15; 17:10) all that the Father has He gave to the Son, thus the Son, who is the movement, gave all to the Holy Spirit: for all that He has (John 16:14, 15) He has from me, He says; for He too is the movement, He has from the movement: for it was not the Son who gave to Him, but He says, "He has from me."
Primarily, movement is life, and this life is knowledge and understanding: therefore, whatever knowledge has, it has from life. This is the supreme Trinity, this is the supreme Unity (John 16:15): "All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said that He will take from what is mine and declare it to you."
This will make it clear enough that what the Father is, life is the Son, and knowledge is the Holy Spirit, that they are one, and one substance, three existences, coming from what is existence, which is the substance of movement, because He too, as we have taught, is the substance, doubling in power, vitality, wisdom, and understanding, so that in all individuals there are three: thus the Holy Spirit is knowledge and wisdom. The sacred readings prove this (First Corinthians 2:16): "Who has known the mind of God, except the Spirit of God?" (Romans 8:16): "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit." Who is a witness without knowledge? And knowledge itself, because it is wisdom, teaches us to be children of God. Also: "Who searches the hearts? Who knows the thoughts of the spirit?" Also, how are both joined to knowledge? (Romans 9:1): "I speak the truth in Christ." Where there is truth, there is knowledge, because truth is Christ; therefore, knowledge is the Holy Spirit. And also: "I do not lie, my conscience bearing witness in the Holy Spirit." What is conscience, but knowledge with another? Now ours with the Spirit, therefore the Spirit is knowledge: and Christ is knowledge, because He is truth; thus both Christ and the Spirit are knowledge. But Christ is life: what if the Spirit is life: for as I said, it is one movement, and the same life which is knowledge: for what is taught in Christ is from God; and when I say taught, I mean from knowledge, whether from Christ or from the Spirit, it is one and the same; for what does Paul say, when he declares that both are the same (Romans 8:6)? "To be spiritually minded is life." For error, imprudence, and ignorance boil and rebel, and this (Romans 8:6) "the mind of the flesh," which is imprudence, and because it does not know God, is death: therefore, the mind of the spirit is life and peace: thus they are already joined, and are one.
Let us prove that God is both knowledge and life, although Paul himself says (Romans 11:33): "Oh, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God!" So it is said by the same (Ephesians 3:10): "The manifold wisdom of God." Hence the secret of God, hence Christ called wisdom, hence also (Ephesians 3:18): "That you may be able to comprehend with all the saints what is the width, length, depth, and height, to know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge." Thus, God is also knowledge, and knowledge frees us, but through Christ, because He is both knowledge, and the gate, and life, and the Word, and all things through whom all things were made.
Therefore, we should both know these things and also have love in Christ. These and many other things show that God is knowledge, and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and also life, as is clearly shown by one example; for in other books we have proven it more abundantly. (John 5:26) Just as the Father has life in Himself, so He has granted the Son also to have life in Himself.  Likewise, it says (John 6:58): As the living Father sent me, so I live because of the Father.  These things are thus singular, as all three are singular. Therefore, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are one substance, God, the Word, the Paraclete. They are one, which is substantiality, vitality, blessedness, silence, but a speaking silence, the Word, the Word of the Word. What also is the will of the Father, if not the silent Word?  Therefore, in this way, since the Word is the Father, and the Son is the Word, that is, the sounding and working Word: therefore, I say, if both the Father and the Son are the Word, it is one substance.
Then (John 5:30): My judgment is just, because I do not seek my own will, but the will of Him who sent me.  Therefore, one will, hence one substance: because will itself is substance. But the Word itself is shown to be life in this way (John 5:40): You do not want to come to me to have life.
Then also, the whole mystery of this is what I explain (John 6:37): All that the Father gives me will come to me.  Because truly, the same motion is what being is, and being is motion, and because by a certain intelligence being is first, from that which moves, but first according to the cause: therefore, the Father gave to the Son both motion, who has and what being is. Therefore, motion is the Word; thus he who has motion has being. Being, however, is life and knowledge: therefore he has all things, because he has being from the Father: therefore the Son fulfills the will of the Father. And what will, except that since the Father is life, His motion is life? This is the will, to make others live.
This therefore and of the Word, that is, of Christ (John 6:39-40): What is the will of the Father who sent me? That I should lose nothing of all that He has given me, but raise it up on the last day. For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who sees the Son and believes in Him may have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.  But to see Christ is to know God the Son of God, life, and the God of life; and this is to have received the Holy Spirit, the Word, which is life. Hence it is proven (John 6:69-70): To whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life, and we believe and know that You are the Christ, the Son of God.  The whole mystery is Christ the Son of God, Christ the Word, and the Word itself, the Word of eternal life. Therefore, this Word which is life, and whoever hears and believes, surely knows God: therefore, he also has the Holy Spirit.
Here the full faith is pronounced, indeed by the disciples. Also, He says to the Jews (John 8:19): If you knew me, you would know my Father also. You neither know me nor my Father.  And rightly so. For although the Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son, existence or substance in life, and life in substance; yet since substance is invisible, it is not understood except in life. But life is more Christ, although also substance: therefore the Father is known in the Son.
Why? Because you do not know me, nor the Father; if you knew me, you would know the Father also. What is this itself? You would know that I am from Him, because He Himself is also knowledge, which is the Holy Spirit. Likewise to them because the Word is, and the Father is the Word: therefore one substance (John 8:26): He who sent me is true, and I speak to the world those things which I heard from Him.  The Father speaks to the Son, the Son to the world: because the Father does all things through the Son, and the Son by the power of the Father's Word does all things, that is, speaking the Word with Himself, makes all things manifest by the Word. Speaking the Word with Himself, God is with the Son, because the Father and the Son are one God.
He also says (John 8:51): Truly, truly, I say to you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death.  And again (John 8:55): I know the Father, and I keep His word.  Both are the Word. But as I said...
How is it in John (John 10:17-18)? "The Father loves me because I lay down my life to take it up again. No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have the authority to lay it down and the authority to take it up again."
It is clear that Christ was never called a soul, nor was God ever called a soul. Indeed, the Father is called God, and the Spirit is called God. Similarly, the Son is called the Word, and the Spirit is called God, undoubtedly God: since both are one God. Therefore, the Word and the Spirit are above the soul, with their superior substance, a substance very different from the soul's and inferior, because it was breathed and born from God, and it is the only substance truly called what it is, because it exists in its own forms, just like matter.
Additionally, God is life, Christ is life, and indeed life from Himself, but Christ has life from the Father who gives it to Him: therefore life is superior to the soul. For earlier, life and vitality existed before the soul: therefore God and the Word are of the same essence, the Father and the Son. Just as the Spirit is life and this life, and that life. Similarly, the Word and the Word, and other things. Therefore, the Spirit has the power to take, lay down, and take up the soul again. Indeed, life, and life from itself, has the power to take and lay down that which it makes live by its power and participation: for the soul was made in the image of God's image (Genesis 1:26): "Let us make man in our image and likeness." Therefore, it is inferior and more created or made by God and the Word. Never itself God or the Word. But indeed the Word, not the one who is the general or universal Son, and the seed, origin, and source of all things made through Him. Truly the Word of that soul: how or who, I remember saying, and I will say it in its place. Therefore, universal, because the spirit and life, not the soul, has the power to lay down the soul from itself and take it up again. Therefore, God and the Word, or because they are life or because they are Spirit, live and always live. Surely they live from themselves. Therefore, they are of the same essence. But the soul is of the same essence when it is taken by the divine, that is, by the Word, not indeed by God: for the Word is motion, and the soul is motion, and motion is from itself, hence the soul is the image and likeness of the Word. Therefore, when it is taken, nothing is added to life: for the soul's life is from life, that is, from the power of living. Therefore, when the Spirit takes the soul, it transfers its power and actions to the lower, as it completes the world and worldly things: therefore, the Spirit, and especially the Word of the Spirit, who is life, has the power to take the soul and lay it down: but when it takes it, it is as if it is born into the world, and its power speaks with the world: but when it lays it down, it withdraws from the world and does not work in the world carnally, nor spiritually. This we call its death, and then it is said to be in hell, not without a soul. Hence it asks (Psalm 16:10) that God does not leave his soul in hell. Therefore, because it is going to return to the world, it leads its act back with it from the underworld, thus it takes up the soul again, that is, the act, it takes the world again, and because the Word performs full and complete acts in the world, and who is Spirit, and soul, and body, therefore it was to be sanctified again, because it had taken these things up again. Therefore, it went to the Spirit, and sanctified, returned, acted with the apostles, acted after the Holy Spirit. Who then is the Holy Spirit? That is, the Word, for it is one motion, and thus it is said: and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again. For who came after Christ's departure, except the Holy Spirit, the Comforter?
This is as I say: as the Father and the Son are one, so Jesus and the Holy Spirit are one: and therefore all are one, as John declared with the reading joined; for he began from the Word (John 14:6): "I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me." For who reaches that which truly is, and truly is being, which is the Father, except through life: for life which is true life, because it is eternal, this truly is being, for nothing changes, nothing is corrupted, which are kinds of death, life is being, true life is (Job 17:2): "He lives," he said.
God. Therefore, life is God. And in the Book of John chapter 14, verse 19, Jesus says, "I live," Whoever comes to Christ comes to life, and thus through life to God. Therefore, God and the Word are united. And hence it is said in John chapter 15, verse 23, "Whoever knows me knows the Father." And in John chapter 14, verse 9, "Whoever has seen me has seen the Father." Hence also in John chapter 14, verse 11, "Do you not believe that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me?" Hence the mystical statement in John chapter 14, verse 14, "If you ask anything in my name, I will do it."
What does it mean to ask in Christ's name? To become an eternal soul, to see the light of God, to come to see Him, to have eternal life, not riches, not children, not honors, nothing worldly, but everything spiritual, and everything by which we are united to God through Christ. For this is to be glorified in the Son, that is, eternal life, which I will give to those who ask.
It then continues fully about the Holy Spirit, what it is, from where it comes, and what it is in John chapter 14, verses 15 and 16: "If you love me, keep my commandments. And I will ask the Father, and He will give you another Advocate, to be with you forever." What is the Advocate, who asserts and strengthens before the Father all faithful and believing men? Who is this? Is it the Holy Spirit alone, or is it also Christ? For He said, "God will give you another Advocate." When He said another, He meant Himself; when He said Advocate, He declared similar work and somewhat the same action. Therefore, the Spirit is the Advocate, and the Holy Spirit is another Advocate, and He is sent by the Father. Jesus, therefore, is the Holy Spirit: for the movement of the Spirit, whence also the Spirit moves, because the Spirit in John chapter 3, verse 8, "blows where it wills." And He now says, "The Spirit of truth," and so His name is the Holy Spirit, the Spirit also of Christ, and the Spirit of God, therefore all are Spirits. But God is substantively Spirit: for in Him is both substance and movement: or rather the substance itself, which is movement, but remaining in itself, as we have often said and will often repeat for the sake of retention. But indeed, Jesus and the Holy Spirit are truly moved movement; hence working externally, but Jesus is an open spirit: for He is also in the flesh: but the Holy Spirit is hidden; Jesus indeed who infuses understandings, no longer who makes signs, or speaks in parables, teaches that He Himself is, in John chapter 14, verse 18, "I will not leave you orphans, I will come to you." But He teaches that He is hidden in the Holy Spirit in John chapter 14, verse 19, "The world will no longer see me, but you will see me, because I live, you also will live." This is also given to the Holy Spirit in John chapter 14, verse 16, "that He may be with you forever, the Spirit of truth." And He said of Himself in John chapter 14, verse 6, "I am the truth." Then He added in John chapter 14, verse 19, "Whom the world cannot see." And He said of Himself in John chapter 14, "The world will no longer see me." Then He added in John chapter 14, verse 17, "Because it does not see Him, nor know Him." But no one knew Christ either in John chapter 1, verse 11, "He came to His own, and His own did not know Him." He added in John chapter 14, verse 17, "You will know Him, because He remains with you, and is in you." And He said of Himself in John chapter 14, verse 19, "You will see me." And because Christ is life, He added of Himself in John chapter 14, "Because I live, you also will live." And because the Holy Spirit is understanding, but the world itself lacks both, He added in John chapter 14, verse 17, "Because He remains with you, and is in you."
But how is the Holy Spirit either in them or now remains, if He is yet to come later, and has not already begun to be with them through Christ? Therefore, they are united and from one, who is movement. This is explained more clearly in the following, for He says in John chapter 14, verses 25 and 26, "I have spoken these things to you while remaining with you. But the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things that I have said. I," He says, "remain in you." For life is given, and Christ no longer departs from them: therefore, they are also with spiritual movement, which is Christ remaining in them: but the souls themselves, in which the spirit remains, never depart, yet it is said in John chapter 16, verse 16, "Now I go to the Father."
What this means can be easily understood.
If it is understood from the mystery and the physical mystery:
For spiritually, since He is in the Father, and the Father in Him, where, or why would He go? From the same mystery, it is that the Spirit came to Christ in the form of a dove, and that now the Spirit will be sent by the Father, and will be sent to the Father, with Christ going and asking for it to be sent: for life is recalled from death, and life is not the same as life, because the Word is life: for this does not know death, rather this itself kills death; but the life that rose from death in people. Which He certainly took on together with the body, and He reclaimed it from the underworld. Therefore, to sanctify this, He had to go to the Father, but physically and naturally, that is, in that which was to be penetrated potentially and existentially in the Father Himself:
Thus He went to the Father. Finally, the time of absence was not prescribed, but rather it was stated (John 20:1, 17, 18, 19, 20, 27, 29), that on the night following the Sabbath He appeared to Mary, not wanting to be touched until He went to the Father: Mary announced to the disciples: on the same night He came to them, showing His hands and side, certainly no longer forbidding to be touched. Later, Thomas touched and felt, indeed at His urging, because he doubted, which signifies that He had already been sanctified. How brief therefore this time is, but it was said for the mystery: I will go to the Father: for since He is in the Father, and the Father in Him, where will He go? Therefore, by the same mystery: whom the Father sends to you, because the Father sends, when Christ sends. Finally, He says: The Father sends in My name, that is, for Me: or in My name, since the Spirit is Christ, and He Himself is the Holy Spirit; or in My name, because the Holy Spirit Himself will bear witness about Christ, for it is said (John 15:26): He will bear witness about Me. Who is He? Whom I send to you from the Father: all are united: I send, I send from the Father, I send the Spirit of truth: therefore, the Word, that is, Jesus Himself sends; for the principal and universal movement which is vital and life itself, sends the movement of intelligence, which as He taught, is from life and is life itself: to know what it is, this is to live, this is to be. But what is this being, than to be from the substance of God, which is to be Spirit? From which we become spiritual, having received the Spirit from Christ, and hence eternal life: therefore this Trinity is called the Spirit. For it is said (John 4:24): God is spirit. Also said by Paul to the Corinthians in the second letter (Second Corinthians 3:17): Now the Lord is the Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom. Certainly these things about Christ, indeed He is called the Holy Spirit who sanctifies the Saints, that is, makes them Saints; and certainly He is the Spirit of God: for He is called prudence, wisdom, and knowledge of all things, for it is added about Him (John 16:8-10): He will convict the world about sin, and about righteousness, and about judgment. About sin, He says, because they do not believe in Me, whether that Christ is life, or that He is the Son of God and sent by God, and who forgives sins. About righteousness, because I go to the Father: for so many in the mystery of the passion, because He kept and fulfilled the faith of the commandments: for when He said, while wanting something else (Matthew 26:42): Your will be done. Also because leaving those warned, no longer to be seen in the same way, it was righteousness to go to the Father, and not only to go to the Father, but already to be with Him: For it is said therefore (Matthew 26:64): He sits at the right hand of the Father. About judgment: because the prince of this world has been judged: for by the mystery of the cross all powers opposed to Christ have been triumphed over by Christ Himself. These, He says, the Holy Spirit will teach. What is chosen? The mystery of salvation is completed by the Paraclete, and what Christ did not complete is cut off: Or because Christ Himself is the same as the Holy Spirit, or because He sends Him, or because the Spirit has all the things of Christ? He has all things, celebrated through Christ.
And yet let us see what He will do, the Spirit will give knowledge of deeds, and the insinuation of knowledge, as the force of testimony, and will rather hold judgment, either for repentance or for punishment; about sin, He says, because...
In me, they did not believe.
So that the world may know its punishment already.
Regarding righteousness, because I am going to the Father.
And this could be about the sin committed by those who unjustly crucified him, because he called himself the Son of God.
And now he goes to the Father, which will also be for everyone, if they believe in God and follow God's commands:
so that they too may go to the Father.
For they are justified, as it is said in Genesis 15:6:
Abraham believed, and it was counted to him as righteousness.
Then about judgment, he says, because the prince of this world has been judged.
These things, as can be seen, are not about salvation, which has already been completed by Christ, but pertain to the knowledge of events.
For the Father is the speaking silence, Christ is the voice, and the Paraclete is the voice of the voice.
Therefore, the Holy Spirit in this act is another Paraclete, cooperating in the mystery of salvation like Christ, in the Spirit of sanctification which is God.
If therefore in this way Christ is the Spirit, but God in the mystery of eternal life is Christ, in sanctification the Holy Spirit sanctifies as God, as it is said in John 17:17:
Sanctify them in the truth, the Son says to the Father, therefore the Father sanctifies.
Likewise, Christ sanctifies, as it is said in John 17:19:
And for their sake I sanctify myself, that they also may be sanctified in truth.
Likewise, the Holy Spirit sanctifies, for baptism pertains to sanctification:
it is said therefore in the Acts of the Apostles 1:5:
John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.
Which he poured out on them for knowledge:
for they were already sanctified by baptism, calling on God through Christ; to the Holy Spirit it is also said: Sanctify them in the truth.
And the truth is Christ; the Paraclete is also the Spirit of truth:
therefore everyone who is baptized, and claims to believe, and receives the faith of truth, that is, the Holy Spirit, becomes holier by the Holy Spirit, and therefore it is said in the Acts of the Apostles 1:8:
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you.
Not for sanctification, but for knowledge, and for those things which Christ promised in the Gospel about the Holy Spirit, that is, about the Paraclete.
First, to give testimony about Christ, for he says:
You will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem.
But also Luke says in John 7:39:
For as yet the Spirit had not been given.
Yet he gives testimony.
Paul, in all his letters, consistently testifies about Christ.
After Christ's departure, he alone saw Christ, and Christ appeared to him alone.
Therefore, the Spirit through Christ and Christ through the Holy Spirit were present.
Likewise, John and Peter testify in First John 1:1:
What we have heard, what we have seen, what we have touched.
In the Acts of the Apostles, Luke writes about David in Acts 2:30-32:
Being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn an oath to him that he would set one of his descendants on his throne, he foresaw and spoke about the resurrection of Christ:
that he was not abandoned to Hades, nor did his flesh see corruption.
This Jesus God raised up, and of that, we all are witnesses.
In Acts 2:4:
And suddenly there came from heaven a sound like a mighty rushing wind, and it filled the entire house, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues.
The Apostles speak about the sin of the world, that it did not believe in Christ, in Acts 2:22-24:
As you yourselves know, this man, delivered up by the definite plan and foreknowledge of God, you crucified and killed by the hands of lawless men.
But God raised him.
Also in the Acts of the Apostles, Peter says in Acts 2:34:
David did not ascend into heaven, but he himself says:
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand.
Paul also says in Romans 8:34:
Who is at the right hand of God.
Therefore, they taught that after the resurrection he went to the Father.
He immediately added in the same place:
Who indeed intercedes for us.
Therefore if Christ intercedes, the Paraclete also does.
Likewise in Acts, it is testified in Acts 1:9-10:
While they were watching, he was lifted up, and a cloud took him out of their sight.
They watched him going up into heaven, and so on.
Three things have already been said about the testimony concerning Christ: about sin, about righteousness, and now about judgment.
Thus, Paul spoke to the Romans through the Holy Spirit:
Romans Chapter Sixteen, Verse Twenty: "The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet."
Similarly, he said to the Ephesians:
Ephesians Chapter Four, Verse Eight: "When he ascended on high, he took many captives."
In Revelation, he also said:
Revelation Chapter One, Verse Eighteen: "And I hold the keys of death and Hades."
Also in Revelation:
Revelation Chapter Twelve, Verse Seven: "Then war broke out in heaven. Michael and his angels fought against the dragon."
The entire passage shows that the devil has been judged.
Therefore, it is established that these three powers—by their common and specific actions and substance, which are the same—constitute unity and divinity.
For this reason, they are referred back to the Son and the Father: for the Father is, as it were, dual, in existence and action, that is, substance and motion, but internal motion, self-generated motion, and since the substance is motion, the Son, since he is motion and self-generated motion, is of the same substance.
These are one and the same without conjunction and simple without duplication, fittingly in their own way of existence, in power and capacity: because one is never without the other, they are one and the same in action; but the one that is external falls into passions, while the other remains internal, eternal, original, and substantial, and therefore always the Father in reasoning and always the Son.
Paul in all his letters says:
Galatians Chapter One, Verse One: "Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ."
Also:
John Chapter Ten, Verse Thirty: "Not from men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father."
Also in the Gospel:
John Chapter Fourteen, Verse Nine: "I and the Father are one: I am in the Father, and the Father is in me."
We also always reverently use the terms Father and Son, and rightly according to the aforementioned reasoning: for motion, as we have taught above, is the Son, and motion itself is life and knowledge, or wisdom.
Paul certainly expressed fully what we wanted to be understood:
First Corinthians Chapter One, Verses Four and Five: "I always thank my God for you because of his grace given you in Christ Jesus. For in him you have been enriched in every way—with all kinds of speech and with all knowledge."
We said the Word is Christ, that is, life, knowledge, the Holy Spirit; therefore, they are one: "For in Christ," he says, "you have been enriched."
Thus, if God and Christ are one, and Christ and the Spirit are one, rightly the three are one in power and substance: the first two, however, are one in a different way, the Father as actual existence, that is, substantiality; the Son, however, as existential act.
The other two are thus two, in that Christ and the Holy Spirit are two in one, that is, in motion, and thus two, so that one is two: the first two are two in one, thus when in one two, and when two one, the Trinity exists as one.
Why should I recount many things about the Holy Spirit, who has been treated in detail? Through him, Christ is conceived in the flesh; through him, Christ in the flesh is sanctified in baptism; he is in Christ who is in the flesh; he is given to the Apostles by Christ who is in the flesh so that they may baptize in God, and in Christ, and in the Holy Spirit.
He whom Christ in the flesh promises to come, by a certain distance of action, is the same himself: Christ and the Holy Spirit; and because he is the Spirit, therefore he is God: because Christ is what the Spirit is, therefore God: whence the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit, are not only one, but also one God.
Book Four
Does life exist as one thing, the same thing, or another thing?
One thing. And why do two names mean the same thing, and how?
Since it is one thing to be in action, another thing to be the action itself, therefore, they are different. But how are they different?
Since in that which lives, there is life, and in that which is life, it necessarily lives: for what lives is not without life, nor does life exist without living.
Hence, one thing in another, and from this, two in any one thing: and if as two, not purely as two, since one thing is in the other, and they are in each other, therefore the same.
But the same exists in two, and is different from itself: therefore, it is both the same and different in any one of these.
But if it is the same, and each is the same and one to itself; for since one exists in the other, neither is as a twin; therefore, if each is in itself and the other, it will be one in itself; but since each is one in itself, the same one is in the other: but since the same one is in the other, both are truly one: for neither is different, neither in the power of existing, nor in time, perhaps in cause, and this is prior to the other.
To judge this more easily, we will examine these things better.
Living and life are such that both living is life, and life is living; not as doubled one in the other, nor one with the other: for this is union: even if inseparably joined, it is united, not one?
Now indeed, with the same action, life is living, and in the same way, life is being.
For we speak of these two, living and life; not of that which has life and living as an effect. Although the third itself, and in that which has life, and as one from the other, yet as one both.
From this, it appears what each existence in its own things is worth, with the same substance remaining, they preserve their being without any innovation: for the being of life is to move: and to move is to live.
Therefore, being and living is, and being life: therefore, one and the same substance: for to each, in that it is, its being is substance.
Indeed, in the higher and eternal, that is, in the intelligible and intellectual, nothing is accidental, nothing is quality, nothing is twin, nor with another, but all are living, intelligent substances, pure, simple, of one kind, by the same they exist and live, and understand; and by the same they understand, they are.
Therefore, living and life is one substance.
But since the intellect reveals itself, and speech proceeds, so that in living there is life; and in life, there is life because it lives: it must be seen and examined with careful reasoning whether this natural composition and twin mode of existence is pure simplicity or one, or two.
If it makes no difference, living and life are the same; and being life, the force contains living; rightly and deservedly we will say that these are one, not a twin union for the existence of itself.
But if firstly, living is one thing, being life is another.
And likewise, if there is a difference, as now life is the cause for living, now living is the cause that life exists: these are two, but twin in themselves, and simply united: for divine reason and power relate these twins, as of the same nature and power, one from which the other is.
Yet there is some difference, however small, hence it is not a twin in vain.
For action and acting are not the same, nor power and operation, nor, to speak more truly, the cause is not the same as the effect: for the former is the origin, the latter is the birth.
Hence, since these two, living and life, are action and acting, although they are together in themselves, yet they must be considered of different force and nature, so that one is the cause of the other, the other is the effect.
But as I understand, and the approved opinion is, that in the principal and natural origin of the first divinity, first is living, secondly is life; thus reason will teach, and truth will approve; living becomes the cause, and the effect of living is life, which however is itself living and life: for both are together, and always were known together.
To the second and third, or whatever follows, which live by an ordered cause and principle, so that life and living are the same and simultaneous; but this living, according to life, is life when it exists. The first and primary living is both the cause of life, the fountain, and the origin of the living.
I know this may seem obscure, not so much in the matters, but in the repetition of the same words, because these two are connected in such a way that when life exists, living also exists, and when living exists, life also exists. Hence, when either one is established, the doubling of the other will seem unnecessary.
Listen, reader, listen to what will amaze you, reader: these things, so difficult, so convoluted, so closed in the treatment of God and divine matters, we will open with simple discussion. We all certainly admit God, Almighty God, God above all, God before all, God from whom all things come. When we admit this, we also undoubtedly confess that He exists. What do we believe this existence to be? What do we think?  (John 4:24) "God is Spirit," he says, "light; and the true light is God." What do we believe this to be, that is called spirit? We are compelled to understand spirit as a certain existing, living, and intelligent substance: indeed, in the highest places and around God, it is almost humble and alien; and in later times, the name does not seem to fit the substance. But why should we avoid this word?
Since existence is to any being that which is its substance. And in Jeremiah, God speaking says, "If you had stood in my substance, you would have seen my word."  So also not long after, and in many other places. Therefore, spirit is substance, that is, its existence: let us gather then according to John (John 4:24): "God is Spirit; and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth." God, he says, is spirit, this is the essence of God, which is existence: therefore, the substance of God is spirit, the same substance, that is, which is living: not that substance is one thing and living another, but the living itself is the substance itself.
For if it is said by the same (John 6:63): "It is the Spirit that gives life," certainly it is the one who gives life, who lives, and is the power of life: therefore the spirit lives, God lives.  Moreover, because He lives, as we said above, and is life, therefore Spirit and life are the same, as John also says: "The Spirit is life"; therefore God, when He is Spirit, both lives and is life. Paul also to the Romans (Romans 8:1-2): "There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus, who do not walk according to the flesh: For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and death." He says Spirit of life, for these three are spirit: God, Jesus, the Holy Spirit.
And concerning God, I think it has been proven that He is spirit: and that spirit lives, gives life, and is life substantially, so that these things are understood, and that it is a simple and single substance, so that to be spirit is to live, and to be life.  But not this living which is ours, or of animals, or of elements, or of those created from elements, or of the world, or of all in the world, or of angels, demons, or even those whom they call gods in the world: no, I say, that living is not in God. God is what it is to live to the soul, or to each one, or to that universal and fountain-like one; not as it is for angels, not as it is for thrones, glories or others existing in the eternal, or in the intellectual, or intellects: but that living, from which these receive life and live according to their own kind of existence, in a certain way progressing, and these as they can receive the power of living vigor, from itself to itself, through itself, in itself alone simple, pure without any beginning of existence from which it is diffused, or progressed, or born the principle through which the living of others would be created.
For living begets life; for by natural power the actor is prior to the action: for the agent begets the action, and as it were gives the word and the thing from itself, it receives itself. This, when right, is also very true by reason: certainly God, to whom this name God fits for omnipotence and principal summity: God, I say, first, if something is to be said about the works of God.
First, the intelligence of the human mind, as it exercises itself and understands things, attributes time to things either existing together, fused together, or arising together, and to different origins. God, I say, first brought forth the existences and substances of universals. Plato calls these ideas, the principal forms of all existing species; for example, being, life, intelligence. And likewise, thisness and otherness, and other such kinds: thus, the genera of genera are poured out, being universally the principal powers of all powers.
Therefore, being, that is, existence or essence; or life, that is, vitality, the first universal power of life, the first source of all living. Likewise, intelligence, the power of understanding, virtue, power, substance, or nature: these three are to be understood as individual, but they are named and said to exist so much as they are in their fullness. For nothing of these is not threefold: for to be, if it lives, is to be in life. But to live is not to live without having intelligence: thus, mixed and as it is a thing, simple in threefold simplicity.
For whatever is this in itself, and is another, is not to be called twin at times, but always one.
But more on these things elsewhere. Therefore, God is living, which is highest, first, fountain-like, primarily principal. He produced these three by His work of living, that they might exist. These thus came about by His work, and this is the offspring, this is the generation, that from the acting comes the act; from what is essence or being, from the living comes vitality or life, from the intelligent comes intelligence, the universal intelligence of universal intelligences.
Therefore, living is prior to life: although in what is living, life is; but living is the parent of life, and life is the offspring, being generated by the living. Therefore, God is living, that first living from Himself, living before all living, and before the very living of life: acting and always acting, and acting from no beginning, not acting from action, lest action or the appearance of a principle be to the agent, but that action be either produced or exists or is poured out by the work of the agent. This indeed we place in living: therefore, God is living, and principal living, but life as generated. Living therefore is the father, life the son.
For what was made in Him is life, and the Son himself says (John 14:6): I am the way, I am the truth, I am the life. This life is what arose from the Father who lives, and this is that (John 16:27): For I came out from God. Likewise, He says of Himself (John 7:37-38): If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink; whoever believes in me, as Scripture has said, rivers of living water will flow from within them. Hence also what He replied to the Samaritan woman (John 4:10): If you knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to you, 'Give me a drink,' you would have asked Him, and He would have given you living water. Likewise, later (John 4:13): Everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again. Samaritan water is mundane, the soul (John 4:14): But whoever drinks the water I give them will never thirst again, but the water I give them will become in them a spring of water welling up to eternal life.
By these and countless other examples, it becomes clear enough that Christ, the Son of God, is life and eternal life: indeed, He Himself is Spirit like the Father. (John 3:6): For what is born of the Spirit is spirit: the Spirit breathes, and breathes from Himself: to breathe is to live. Moreover, what breathes from itself, lives from itself: what lives from itself, lives from eternity and into eternity: for it never abandons itself, which is its cause, so that it is what it exists.
Therefore, since the Father is what is living, as we have taught above, and living is to be life, likewise what is life is what is generated from what is living, necessarily what is life is what is living: for life lives because it is life, and is life from itself: for from itself it has living: however, from that first, which is primarily living, which is the Father, where and whence it exists.
Life, which includes both living and living from itself, which we prove, understand, and confess to be Jesus Christ, the Son.
All these things which I have said, let us see how they are signified and asserted in the Gospel according to John through the very words of the Savior.
In the book of John, chapter six, verse fifty-eight:  "The living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father."
And so that no one might believe that Christ in the flesh said this, he immediately added in verse fifty-nine:  "This is the bread that came down from heaven."
Then he testifies and teaches that he is life and eternal life:
In verses fifty-four and fifty-five:  "Unless you receive the body of the Son of Man, as the bread of life, and drink his blood, you will not have life in you; but whoever eats his flesh and drinks his blood has eternal life."
Therefore, everything that Christ is, is eternal life, whether spirit, soul, or flesh: for he is the Word of all these things. The principal Word is life: therefore, even those things which he assumes are life; hence these will also earn us eternal life through the Spirit which Christ gives us, having made these spiritual things.
And so that no one might believe that Christ spoke these things about the fleshly Christ, and not about his whole self, who is Spirit, soul, and flesh, what does he say? In verse sixty-three:  "What if you see the Son of Man ascending?"
Who is the Son of Man? Spirit, soul, flesh: for he had these when he ascended, and with these he ascended.
What then does he add? That the spirit might be understood:  "Where he first was: this is, spirit: and life, which is the Father, which is God, from whom these are consubstantial, that is, of the same substance, never existing outside of themselves, primarily principal, one and the same substance, with equal power, the same majesty, virtue, none before the other, except that one is the cause of the other, and therefore the other; but the same other truly because the same one God; because truly the other, therefore first and second; and because one is the cause of the other, therefore father, which is the cause: and indeed that which is from the other, son: in substance truly no difference, no separation in time, no distinction; one motion, one will, and sometimes the appearance of another will, but always the same."
Let us first teach these things to be so by sacred reading, then, as order demands, as necessity requires, and let us consider in those who have one and the same substance, why one bears the power of the sender, the other of the sent: one of the commander, the other of the minister: one free from the passions in the action of moving, the other through infinite acts in creating worlds infinitely, and in those things which are in the worlds, subjected to countless passions up to death.
The first lives, lives from itself, lives eternally, and this is God. What lives itself, as I have taught, has the power of existence or substance, and the nature of life and intelligence: indeed, in that which is being, this is what we call living, and this is understanding, and this is God: therefore, what it is for God to be, is the cause of existence and father. And since in his own being there is life for him, and in that also knowledge of who he is, and he is the source of universal life and intelligence.
For of these three things which are in simple existence in God, or which are God, more being is God: what has from itself to live, and to be life, or to understand, and to be intelligence, as I have taught above, and in many other places. So that now we may take the remaining two, I mean life and intelligence, as generated from that which is being, having their being from that which is first moved to be, having received the power and name of life and intelligence from the prior existence. For in the three things all are named in a certain order: not that there are not three in each of the three, but that by movement they accomplish what they are said to be: for being is the first movement, which when it ceases is called movement, the same inner movement: for when it operates for itself to exist, it is rightly called both inner movement and ceasing movement.
Hence we call movement what is lives and living: now indeed when from that which is lives and living formed and generated in a certain manner in the form of the habit of that which is lives and living the form is formed, this is called life, this is called son. So that as
But wherever it may be, whether placed there where it is, or elsewhere, it leads us to know Him whose it is. Thus, life makes us know what it means to live, for living is an act. In action, at every moment, it is a course. Therefore, it is said in the Gospel according to John:  No one has ever seen God.  For who can see living, which God is, without the life which comes together and exists in a certain form through actions, so that it is the form of the living being? Therefore, the form of what it is to live is life, through which, or in which, what is, lives and seems to live, is received and recognized. This is signified by the saying of the Savior from the Father:  Whoever has seen me has seen the Father.  For the Son of God is the form of God, that is, life, which is the form of the living.
For it was said by Paul to the Philippians:  Who, being in the form of God, did not consider it robbery to be equal with God.  Likewise to the Colossians:  Who is the image of the invisible God.  Therefore, Jesus Christ is both the image and form of God. We have also said that in the form is seen that of which it is the form, and in the same way, in the image is seen he whose image it is, especially if he whose image it is, is invisible, as it is said:  The image of the invisible God.  In the same way, it is said in the Gospel according to John:  No one has ever seen God, except the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father.  And also thus it was said to Moses in Exodus:  You cannot see my face; for no one can see my face and live.  However, he allowed his back to be seen, that is, below, and other parts besides the face.
IX. How many mysteries are here? How many types of questions? How many signs to declare both God and Jesus Christ, that there is substance, and that both are one substance, and that both together are one substance, and that the substance is from the Father to the Son? All these, and other such things, can in no way be explained, understood, and approved unless the previous discussion shines forth with clear perceptions. Therefore, let us have a fixed belief that God is spirit, and the spirit from which both the Son is spirit, and the Holy Spirit is spirit, as it is said in John:  That which is born of the spirit is spirit.  And also in John:  The spirit gives life.  What gives life, indeed, lives itself. What lives, because it is spirit, lives from itself. What lives from itself, this itself is what lives. And because what lives from itself, since it is itself what lives, it has nothing else that is called living. For it is not made alive, but it lives itself, exists living or to live. Because it lives, and to live is to act, in that it lives from itself, it never began. For it did not wait for another, nor did it ever abandon itself, nor will it ever abandon itself. Therefore, it lives from eternity and to eternity, the principal and universal substance of living. Not so that it is a substance, and thus living, but that which is living itself, this itself is substance. For when it is living itself, and lives, and is understood to be living, and in some way to be, its being itself is not its own, that is substance. This is also called spirit in all sacred reading and the words of things themselves.
X. But the spirit breathes, and breathes from itself, and God is spirit. Indeed, it breathes, that is, it lives. Therefore, the spirit, who is God, lives from itself and always. It lives, I say, and in the act of living, and in the very work of life when it lives, it works life. Therefore, eternal life is born from the living God, it is generated, and because it lives, it is substance itself. And what is from Him who lives, and life itself is substance, by the same equal and together, because life itself exists by living so that it is life. Therefore, to live is spirit, and the spirit is life. It encompasses both, and is in both, and neither is as a twin and adjunct, but with the simplicity of existence from itself and in itself, as of another substance duplicated, never separated from itself, because in each it is a twin. For indeed, to live is with life, and life again is with that which is to live. But to live, as we have taught, is God, life is Christ. And because to live is the generator of life, for in the act, which is to live, as a certain offspring life is generated, to live becomes the Father, the Son life, in this way indeed, the one is the other, therefore two.
Where do two come from, except
one from the other? And that which comes from the other is always a son,
but that from which the other comes is a father. But now,
the other is not separate and distinct, but
only different in that it is made and being made,
and generating and being generated, with both united as one in substance,
since living is life and life itself is living: hence the father and the son are one God.
And because the natural conversion of existence is only one:
just as living is in life, and life is in living; the conversion is one and the same.
Wherefore, since living is in what life is,
the only begotten son is consubstantial with the father, one son, one father.
Hence, one and the same substance,
simultaneously and always: This is indeed of the same substance, having the same substance together,
and equal power and strength of existing, the same nature of substance, with no preceding time;
which we call consubstantial, with the causal prior being living, to what is life, as that which generates and is father,
and that which is generated and is son, both to be, and to be called being.
Therefore, because they are within each other, and even though the father exists, the son does not:
and likewise, when the son exists,
the father, of whom the son is, does not; yet by the force of things and the equality of substance,
since living is life and life is one, it was rightly pronounced by the divine voice of the Savior (John 16:10, 11):
And I am in the Father, and the Father is in me. Hence also this (John 10:30):
I and the Father are one: for
when guided by the force and nature of things, everything is nothing if it does not live, and being devoid of vital motion,
neither matter nor the image or appearance of existence is believed to have form:
for the slippery and inconsistent force of flowing and ebbing nature does not receive subsistence,
nor does it take form, to be said to be something.
Therefore, lacking that which is something to be, even
it holds its own being, so that it is rightly said not to be in any way.
But now, comprehended and whole, and circumscribed in parts,
and formed, and embodied in this, and seized by some form to be and believed to be: because
with vital motion, and enclosed by definite lines from the infinite, it is brought into certain senses.
Therefore, the hylic things, to appear to be, are made by the vital force and power,
which flowing from that logos which is life, which we call
the son, through Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Glories,
and other things above the world, first into bodies,
and courtyards, running and flowing in their pure and natural substance,
experiences its light with greater communion, soon coming gradually into the soul and the source of the soul.
Because the soul is the image of the logos, it receives a greater flow
as if by some knowledge. And because it hastens to animate the soul,
its desire to animate it becomes more eager.
Hence, immersed in matter, and entangled in worldly elements, and finally in the bonds of the flesh, mixing itself with corruption and death itself,
it provides an idol of living to the dregs of matter. Therefore, all earthly, humid,
airy, fiery, ethereal, heavenly things live, not by that previous logos, nor by the full light of life, but because of the hylic connection
wounded by the vital light, they live above the celestial things,
and live more, those which have withdrawn from matter and bodily bonds, such as purer souls, Thrones,
and Glories; likewise Angels and the Spirits themselves, some having life in another,
that is, in their own substance: others are life itself: Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit:
for we will soon teach about this: together with God, but life from God,
but they live with universal life, and live from themselves, and have not what they live in another,
but their very being is to live and to be life,
and to be knowledge given by the father, that is, primarily
existing as that which is living. Therefore,
all these enumerated things live, and nothing exists either in eternal, worldly, or hylic things, which does not live according to its nature:
it must be confessed that there is some force or power
by which all things are made alive, and are raised up into vital spirits, so that from this they live, and because they live, they have been given existence.
Three times the vital spirit breathes into mortals, by which all things thrive, subsist, take their own actions, are generated, and will be generated.  God, without doubt, God, whom our mind reveres as the father of life and the divine essence of living.  We will call Him the power of life, as we have said elsewhere, or the highest and principal life, and generally the universal origin, cause, head, and fountain of all living beings: the principle of existing things, the father of substances, who grants existence to others from His own being, according to the capacity and nature of those receiving the power of life and substance, He governs.
What is He, or in what is He? Indeed, He is alive and true: One, as He allows us to speak of Him: He lives, and lives from eternity and into eternity, having from Himself that very thing which is His substance: He lives; for no action could or should be added to Him, so that He might be less than Himself at times: but always perfect, full, and whole, in what it is to be Him, it is also to be thus: the rest are after God, and are powers, and actions of power, which by their own strength are believed to exist, so that all things seem to both be and have what they possess in their mature processes of existence in their work here: however, they are called actions when they generate existing processes and bring forth what they can be.  Like a seed is already a potential, and a stalk, and leaves; or the outpouring of male or female desire; but these are in the world and under the moon: above, however, in the ether and the heavens, they are actions, and live by actions, but also generated as what they were to become: for from their origin, released into their own proper operations, they run through their acts by the contagion of containing nature.
If these things in the world are actions, how much more are those things in the eternal and above the celestial realms actions, and actions that generated these worldly things? Also both the soul and Angels from souls, and above souls.  For the soul is also αὐτογόνῳ, that is, borne by its own and from itself, motion, it is called αὐτοκίνητος, hence ἀκίνητος: therefore it is always in motion, which is always to act, and to be itself `ενέργειαν, so that its substance is that motion.  For it is said in the book of Genesis, "Let us make man in our image and likeness."  Therefore, it has αὐτόγονον κίνησιν, that is, motion originated from itself, as it is to God, as to Christ.  But since it is not that primary spirit, therefore another substance, and created, not existing from itself, but made to have motion from itself: for the soul is one thing, life is another: life is the habit of living, and as it were a certain form, or state generated by living, containing within itself living itself, and that being which is life, both being one substance: for truly one is not in the other, but one in its simple duality; and therefore in itself, because it is from itself; and hence from itself, because it operates another thing in the seventh simplicity: rest indeed generates nothing; motion and the operation of acting form from itself what it is, or rather how it is: for to be, is to live: to be life, however, is a certain motion, that is, the form of the living, completed by that very thing to which it is a form: but that which completes, that is, to live: because it never began: for what lives from itself does not begin, because it always lives, whence neither does life begin: for the one completing without a beginning, and that which is completed lacks a beginning.  Therefore, simultaneously both and consubstantial.  To live, however, is God, life is Christ: and in what it is to live, it is life, and in what it is life, it is to live.  In this way indeed one in the other, because one completes and the other completes one in the other.  As the one completing in the completed, so the completed in the completing, especially if these are always: therefore both the father in the son, and the son in the father: for indeed the one completing and the completed completing, and the completed by the completing completed; therefore one substance, not one in two, and in one two; but because in which God, in the same the son, that is of such a kind: for as God lives, so the son lives: in what kind of substance the father, in such the son.
But if the father lives, they say, the son also lives, and therefore both in the same and such substance. The substance of this lives, with both being,
Both went without a beginning; both are eternal. But this is excluded by the sacred words of the Evangelist, with the Son himself speaking, our Lord Jesus Christ:
"The Father lives"  John 6:58.
This source is without a beginning. But where does it originate from?
"And I," he says, "live because of the Father." So if because of the Father, he received from the Father; and if he received, he is begotten from the unbegotten. And if he lives, his existence is certain, and the power of substance in both lives in the same way, the same for the Father and the Son, but the Son's substance is from the Father.
For what is born of the Spirit is spirit  John 3:6.
Therefore, from such a substance of the Father, such is the substance of the Son. And to show more clearly that the substance is given from the Father and the same one substance, it is said that he lives, and life is substance. Therefore, the same substance for God, and from God to Christ the Son.
As the Evangelist says: "Just as God has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself"  John 5:26.
Therefore, Christ is of the same substance with God, that is, consubstantial, which means of the same substance, that is, the first, principal, universal substance, from which everything that exists and lives has life injected, that is, not born from itself, nor is its living from itself, which belongs to God and the Son.
As much as life is given to all others, Christ bestows. Living in God is as the primary, producing life from one and the same source of existence, with no precedence in time or power, concerning substance.
Hence, whether we take this to mean consubstantial, that the substance is the same, there is no doubt that it is the same, because he who lives is already life, which is God: and he who is life, lives, which is Christ. And for both, life is from themselves, as it is said: "Just as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself."
If we take consubstantial to mean what it is, being of the same substance, it is more easily and clearly proven what we said about the Father or the Son. For living and life are so simultaneous and always together, that in the act of living, there is life:
and again, life is present in the act of living.
Let us take an example: although what I am saying is more the reality itself, not an example. We have said that God is nothing other than living, but the principal, from which all living of all others originates, their very action in acting existing, and in this kind of movement having its being, which is either existence, or having its own substance. Although not even having, but existing itself, which is primarily and universally living.
That which is produced from this act, and as its form, is life. For just as eternity is produced by the ever-present act of all things, so life is produced by the ever-present act of living.
And to imagine it this way, vitality is, as life’s form is generated for its power and substance. But our living also consists of the ever-present time. For we do not live the past, nor do we live the future, but we always use the present.
This is the only time that, because it is the only time, is said to be the image of eternity. For just as eternity always has everything in the present, and always these things. We too, because we have everything we can have through the present time, therefore this time of ours is an image of eternity, because our present is not the same, nor the same always present.
Thus life is produced by living, and is formed simultaneously by existing: and formation is an appearance; the appearance, however, arises from the hidden, and from the hidden arises and is born, even before it existed. Hence in living life, before life; yet life is later, because life is through living, and always and eternally life: because in what is, lives, and from eternity lives, is life.
Since therefore God lives, Christ is life, because life arises existing from that which also lives; necessarily the Father lives, the Son is life, as we taught above, so that in what is, lives, life is: and in life there is living. Therefore the Son is consubstantial with the Father, as we taught above with examples.
Now it follows that...
Let this be with the Holy Spirit explained. About God, these things have been said and proven: God is what it is to be, the Spirit is what it is to live. Also, light is what it is to be intelligence and knowledge. Indeed, light allows nothing hidden, nothing obscure; it opens, illuminates, enlightens.
Therefore, God is that very thing which is God, which is to be, which is the first and principal being of all that exists, providing being according to the capacity of those perceiving, as we have previously taught. This is, that is, to live, this is to understand, which is to be, which is spirit, which is light. These things are indeed in one and simple, or rather one and simple. These are what it is to be, this we rightly call existence or substance.  But since the principal of these is that which is to be; while the other two, to live and to understand, are understood to be movements, since all movement arises from rest. Rest is what it is to be; from that which is to be, movement arises, and then action: the movement of that first which is to be, is to live and to understand.  Both are indeed movements, and one movement, providing two powers with a twin function, one and the same substance. For substance is movement for them: for in them, being is not different from moving. Similarly, living is not different from understanding as far as substance is concerned. For it belongs to the living to understand, and to the understanding to live, turning upon itself by one movement: yet so that while the work and act of living remains, the act of intelligence is stirred:  whence since Christ is life, the Holy Spirit is knowledge and intelligence: yet all things the Holy Spirit has, He received from Christ, Christ from the Father, that is, from Him who is to be; there is life, and living is knowledge and understanding: nor then, when that first being is such, that when being is, moving is also.
Although it is called rest, it is moved inwardly by the movement by which it lives for itself and understands itself. Therefore, from the internal movement, external movement is born, from that which is inward being, and from that which is inward living, external living, from that which is inward understanding; external understanding, with life and intelligence moving themselves. For movements are in the same way existing together, which is to be, so that it is both inward and outward, this Trinity inwardly, with God one and only outwardly, with Jesus Christ inwardly and outwardly, with both being one God, and from them, God being consubstantial with Christ, necessarily Christ is consubstantial with the Holy Spirit, and thus through Christ with God: He himself also came forth from God. For if every motion that is external is from God's internal motion, thus too this is from God. Indeed, knowledge and intelligence are the existence and power of each's knowing; and this itself is movement, by this very movement of substance: necessarily therefore in Christ, or Christ is, and has all things from Him, because from life which is Christ, intelligence has stood, and therefore another. This indeed is said: And He will take what is Mine (John 16:14, 15). But He also has from Me, they are two: therefore one and another:  But since the Spirit Himself is motion, and Christ is motion, and since true life is Christ, and He gives true life to those who believe in Him, that is eternal, and is with God for those who believe in Him, that He is the Son of God, and that through faith: therefore through Christ we are reconciled to God; indeed, because of humans' buried memory of themselves and God, there is need for the Holy Spirit if knowledge approaches: And to understand what is the width and length and depth and height (Ephesians 3:18); and if love and faith in Christ are confirmed through the Holy Spirit, because it is knowledge, he will be saved: for He fully testifies about Christ, and teaches all things, and is the inner power of Christ, granting knowledge and advancing towards salvation, hence another Paraclete. Indeed, for those dead through sins, life had first to be given, that they might be raised to God through faith, which was already to live from the life of God brought by Christ in the flesh, so that He might also aid the flesh. Therefore, for men confirmed through faith in Christ the Son of God, knowledge also seems to be given, both about Christ and thus about God.
To rebuke the world. When they understood these things, they were more easily freed by the light of God, through the understanding of their human and divine nature, from contempt for earthly and worldly things, and by the desire that knowledge of divine things excites.
Therefore, faith comes later, that is, the later faith works: for when Christ, who had sown faith through miracles and teachings, that he himself was the Son of God and would give life to those who believed in him, had departed, all things were completed by the Spirit, and faith grew in knowledge of Christ, and with Christ always present.
For he said: For he will not speak on his own, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come: he will glorify me, for he will take from what is mine John 16:13, 14.
Therefore, from life comes understanding, and this life comes from living, that is, from the Father to the Son, from the Son to the Holy Spirit; for he added: All things that the Father has are mine John 16:15.
For this reason, he said, they are mine, because what the Father has belongs to the Son, to be, to live, to understand: these same things the Spirit has, all things therefore are of the same substance.
Yet to show his presence always, he speaks according to Matthew: Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you, and behold I am with you always, to the end of the age Matthew 28:19, 20.
From this it is shown in a way that the same Jesus, the same Holy Spirit, though their actions are different, as he teaches understanding, the other gives life.
For indeed it is the same motion and the first motion: by which it happens, that he who lives truly lives, and understands, and truly understands, who truly understands, truly lives.
And to manifest that Jesus and the Holy Spirit are the same, let us consider this: namely the Holy Spirit is doctrine, understanding, and wisdom itself, and wisdom is given to Christ and to God: and this is called Christ, which is the Gospel, that Christ is the Son of God, which the Gospel defines as the power and wisdom of God, as Paul to the Romans Romans 1:16.
Also Solomon: All wisdom is from God, and has been with him always, before the ages Ecclesiasticus 1:1.
Behold the same substance appears with wisdom and is given by God, and from God, indeed to Christ and the Holy Spirit.
And when it is said that it has always been with God, that the same substance is manifest, together with the Father.
Then when it is said, before the ages, not therefore when in the flesh, then Christ.
Also the first of all created is wisdom Ecclesiasticus 1:4.
If the firstborn is Christ, wisdom is Christ.
Then what follows, the Holy Spirit: and the understanding of prudence from the ages.
If the Holy Spirit is prudence, and understanding; if knowledge and doctrine. Christ is without a doubt, for he himself is from the ages, that is, from eternity, and the firstborn, and more importantly, the only begotten.
These and other things treated in many books by me prove the same substance not only of God and Christ, but also of the Holy Spirit.
Therefore, let us give or accept that God is that which is the first and principal living, which is the true and principal being: for it is not, which does not live: this very living we have shown to be the operation itself, and generating life.
In what is life, there is knowledge and understanding: therefore God lives, and by living God is life, and with life there is understanding.
But these three as one and simple, and in it as the principal thing, that is, this is what being more exists principally, God lives, necessarily and understanding himself.
For from this he understands all things, because he understands himself.
He is the cause of all existences, and therefore all things: therefore life and understanding accepted in that which is being within, always operate, which is living.
To live for God is therefore to exist. Therefore, all things, one and omnipotent God is.
What then? if he operates within himself, or rather himself with life and understanding? How do these things appear as if outside?
Can they do this? And what is inside or outside the being or the word? Philosophers and learned men have asked what they are and where they are. What they are, their substance or existence, let us explain: where they are, whether inside or outside, and in all other things, whether in both and everywhere.
We have discussed these things fully in other books. But now we will briefly summarize them. Before the being and before the word, there is the power and potential of existence, which is signified by the word which is "to be," in Greek "to einai." This very "to be" must be understood in two ways: one, as universal and primarily principal, from which in other things there is being, and another being is for other things what it is, of all genera or species, and of such other things.
But the first being is so unparticipated that it cannot even be called one, nor alone, but by preeminence before one, and before alone, beyond simplicity, preexistence rather than existence, the universal of all universals, infinite, unbounded, but to all others, not to itself: and therefore without form it is heard by some intellect. And it is perceived rather by pre-intelligence than by intelligence, it is known, it is believed.
This is what we said lives or is alive, that infinite, that which is above the living of all universals is itself being, itself living, not anything being, or anything living, hence not "being." For certain is also something that is being, intelligible, knowable. Therefore if not being, nor word, for word is defined, and definer: whether it is reason, or the power of existence itself, or those things which intelligence receives, so that each thing has its being: it knows what it does not know, unless it perceives and understands what those things are, which give each thing its substance: and this is the word of things through which all things were created, the universal power, containing universally the things of all, giving to each its own and proper existence.
Therefore because it gives to each its own and proper existence, it defines and determines, it also makes that being. By imposing a limit on the infinite things for their existence, it forms each thing, and by removing infinity it subjects intelligence. There is therefore in it the power of things to bring forth and make existences the word; from it, however, that defines, and concludes each thing giving form, being, it is now existing, when it has a certain form of what it is to be.
Since this is the case, let us see if there is no word of the first which is to be. If we say infinite, if we say immeasurable, indiscriminate, we do not grasp, do not hold the things which consist in being: therefore it has no word. But since it cannot be, that it exists in any way and without its word this very existing which it is, it is infinite, without a doubt it has its word, but hidden, and occult, so that in it which is being itself the word is; or rather the word itself is nothing else than itself being: this is what I said truly first, that and universally universal living, although, as we taught, it is itself living, and life, and defined intelligence: for the power of the word; indeed it is something defined and formed: intelligence indeed and defining: yet because these are inside, and turned into themselves, all things are unknown, indistinct, unknown and indiscriminate: so also God who is being, that is, living, is unknown and indiscriminate; and its form, that is, the intelligence of life, is unknown and indiscriminate: for these are nothing else than being, which is living. Since it is infinite, and its form is infinite, remaining there, and nothing else than being existing.
But when it begins to be outside, then the form appearing is the image of God, showing God through itself; and it is the word, no longer towards God, in which there is life and intelligence, now being; because certain knowledge and existence, which is grasped by intellect and cognition: but since these have existed outside, and whether that form, which is inside emitted, is outside, or it cast out itself? but since that inner form is indiscriminate and infinite, how and in that which is outside, it is known, or another from?
Is this so? But if it is something else, then it is not born from that one, either by emission or by its own movement. And if so, then it is not a part of the other, nor the same, nor entirely of the same substance. Then from where did this appear?
Therefore, are there two principles from the other, or from nothingness? Nothingness does not exist under the God of beings. Then if it existed by God's power or will, it is not nothingness. For if God is omnipotent, His omnipotence is the cause of everything, and it itself is existence. Shall we then dare to say that this form arose from itself? And how, when it was in the Father, without the Father knowing, or by His command? If by His command, then it did not arise from itself. Or without His knowledge? Therefore, there is something that was not by God's power, or something that existed without Him. Concerning the Word, which is said to be His form, it is written:  All things were made through Him, and without Him nothing was made  (John 1:3). What is this? What is the separation of such confusions? If it is not the truth or the life of truth, let the Holy Spirit be present. Whatever is inspired in us, let the listener now pay attention, we expound it with pure simplicity.
Meanwhile, I advise one thing. It is fitting to understand these things without time, from eternity always without any beginning of time, but so that both principles, the begetter and the begotten, are one. First in eternal matters, especially divine and foremost, they remain at rest, and in that in which they exist, they generate without any change by movement. First God, then the Word, or Mind, or whatever the other is, or both, as spirit, as living, or life, as intelligence, or knowing. But the soul alone has motion and generations. All these things are like a house: God is threefold in power, that is, having three powers, to be, to live, to understand. So that in each there are three, and He Himself is one, taking any of the three names by which He presents Himself, as I have taught above, and to those many. For nothing should be said to exist unless it is understood. Therefore, a threefold singularity in each, and unity in the Trinity. But we will explain these three in their progress.
Of all things that are, and that can be, or could have been, their existence, life, and intelligence are granted according to the capacity of things and substances, and their participations. For in all things there is their being, their living, their understanding, and their feeling, so that these are a shadow or image of the three highest things. Therefore, since God is, as is said by all, one, and only one. However, some have said that God is one and all, and not even one. For He is the principle of all things, from which not all, but in that way all. This, however, is for this reason and first indeed, that God is one and only. Those three, because they do not consist by conjunction, but by existing as they are, and what we believe the other to be, they are necessarily one, and not in any way the other. But this has often been said. What is indeed said to be one and all, and not one, as He is the principle of all things, clearly and openly declares, the Father of all things and the principle of God. Who, although He is not one, is more all. Because He is both the cause of all things and the principle, and in all things everything. Since this is so, God will be all, existing, all-living, all-seeing, and all-knowing. And since we have said that power is brought forth by act: for thus the first things are, that since all things are from divine energy, that is, act and operations; it is necessary that from God, the principle of all powers, the source and origin of all universals are born. This indeed is the progression of things, that since all things are from God, powers and acts from God, who is accepted above powers and acts, these are believed to have arisen.
But since we have said that God is a certain act, which is living, but this living which is above all living, and from eternity, and forever, living together with understanding accepted, and with that which is being, and with that which is understanding, but so together, that not even the fantasy of conjunction exists. But necessarily by the act of living, as I have taught, the form which we call universal power is confessed and exists, formed by each of those, which from all existence, from all-living all-livingness, from all-seeing all-seeingness. These individual powers are as known and determined. But since all things are in one, or one.
Either everything, or with one
everything, or neither one nor everything, becomes infinite, becomes unknown,
indistinguishable, unknowable, and what is truly called indefiniteness, which means infinity, and indeterminacy.
For the being of all things, and the life of all things, and the intelligence of all things, and that one, and without the fantasy of another one:
whence neither one, because it is the principle of all things: whence also of that one itself.
From this we are now necessarily compelled to say these things about God,
that His being, and living, and understanding are incomprehensible,
and not only that His being, living, and understanding are incomprehensible;
so that these do not even appear to be, because He is above all things: therefore He is called without existence, without substance, without intelligence, without life: not indeed through privation but through transcendence;
for all things that words name, are after Him: hence He is not being, but rather pre-existing.
In the same way pre-existence, foresight, foreknowledge of those things which are completed: He Himself is pre-existing, foreseeing, foreknowing: but all these are seen and understood, and named by the secondaries.
For after knowledge appeared, foreknowledge was understood and named;
in the same way pre-existence, and pre-living.
These indeed were, but not yet noticed, not yet named.
Hence all that God is, is unknowable.
But since it is then knowable and is said to be when there is knowledge: for they are relative, and hold and produce each other, or destroy each other,
that which was not yet knowable was not, because there was no knowledge.
Not that that which made itself knowable by knowledge did not exist;
but because what could be knowable was indeed, not that it was knowable: for it is made and received then, when it is understood, that it can also be intelligence.
Thus in God, it could both be, and be knowable; because it could be, therefore there was knowledge.
What then from these?
Because if these were later born, they were in God: and if they were, since God is one, and these are one, and what God is, and these are one because God.
These therefore the same are knowable and knowledge; but so that what is knowable, is knowledge.
For when the power of these three is one: to be is nothing other than to live, and to live itself is to understand, since to be understood is to be; the whole power of each is in knowing, or being knowledge.
But to be knowledge cannot be, unless it is knowable: in these first where being is, that is living, and understanding, being knowable cannot be, unless knowledge itself is not yet apparent, but holding itself within, remaining quiet, resting, and turned to itself making itself knowable.
For when knowledge itself lies hidden, and is with itself, entering itself from outside, but naturally immersed in that in which its being is, remaining; it is of its form, that it can be knowable when knowledge is awakened as if going out, looking around, making itself knowledge, it becomes its knowable self by knowing itself.
Thus, if it is permissible to say, thus I say, that first, that one alone, that God, or spirit, or breathing, or light, or illuminating, or existing, or all-existing, or existence, or all-existence, or living, or all-living, or life, or living things, or all-living things, or understanding and knowing, or all-understanding, all-knowing, or all-intelligence, all-knowledge, almighty, in every way perfect, unending, immense, but limited and measured to others, above all, and therefore none of all, and more from which all.
Therefore one and only one: for it is the principle of all. Hence not one remaining in itself, nor within itself, not two, hearer, receive, but itself remaining or remaining, quiet quiet, resting more, because from the resting is rest, as we taught above.
Hence it is also said to sit as if in the center of all things that are, from where with a universal eye that is, the light of its substance, which...
To be is either to live or to understand. Among beings, it does not see with a shifting view because it is also at rest. From the center, simultaneously, in all things one is seen. This is God. But how God is the Father, and who the Son is, or how the Son, and later how Jesus is the Son of all, to be the beginning, before all things to be, is of all to be. The beginning is not so much to be at rest as to be rest itself. For all things that are born or made are born or made from motion. But motion itself, the place where motion is, before it is moved, is at rest. For the birth of contraries is the destruction of contraries, so that by the contrary birth the contrary from which it was born perishes. Not to be, so from life comes death, and from death comes life. Likewise, from what is to be, and from what is not to be, it would be. And likewise, from rest comes motion, and from motion comes rest.
25. But let us consider more sharply, and with bold intelligence see the force and height of things. As these things are proposed, if a diligent observer pays attention, he will find that there is a certain existence even in these, whose fantasy is to perish. For when life is present, to which to be is added, from which death is born, there is also to be death, if from death life is born. Likewise, if from what is to be, non-being is produced, necessarily there will also be non-being itself, if from it is born what is to be. Likewise, if there is cessation, it is necessary for motion to be cessation, if motion is born. What then? Are not contraries believed to be born from the birth of contraries, or to die, or not to be? It seems so, but it is the opposite: for both remain, nor do they perish from their eternal substantial quality. How this is, I will say, God be present, the explanation will be easier. To be in eternal things, this is to be, which is to live, which is to understand. We have often said and proved these things. But to be so there, that there are living and understanding substances: let us take these as existing things to provide three things, and by their participation to retain all things, and to flourish in the intellect, to be simple, divine, eternal alone. In worldly and material things indeed to be present, but to be sustained by various and mortal bodies. Here therefore, if there is death, it is the death of bodies; and if more intention is applied, not even of bodies, that is, in what they are matter, but of these bodies, in the form that now is; the dissolution produced by a certain destruction. Therefore, only the form of the body is dissolved when it is dispersed into elements. They remain and are from where life is repaired. For since in the world and matter exists, which always exists in certain elements, and since the images of those three, here also, that is, in the world, appear, what does death do when even in their images they are eternal? I say images, powers flowing through all things from the lines of the soul. Since therefore these are eternal, the elements are eternal in matter. Death, if it dissolves only the compound, completely perishes. Hence it is rightly said, that from life death is produced, that from the vigor of living any compound of a body is made up to a certain dissolution, and again from death a new composition is made from the same things. In this way, both being in the world should be accepted, in this way here both rest and motion. But in divine things, because there are no bodies, there is no death, but life in another way, since that is principal and true. And therefore there progress is not natal, or if you prefer, natal more appearance and manifestation. Likewise, there to be in another way, and not to be, and in another way motion and cessation. For God lives; that is to be and to understand, which these three make up one, three powers: existence, life, understanding.
26. But because I have taught how those three are one: one thing is three in any way, so also these three are one. But in God these three are to be, in the Son to live, in the Holy Spirit to understand. Therefore, to be, to live, to understand are to be in God. Existence, life, understanding are forms: indeed by the inner and hidden act of that which is to be, to live, to understand: inside they are so and hidden, and more above to be, and above to live, and above to understand God is. Hence also anousios, or anupakrtos and likewise azon, anous is said, found by a certain pre-intelligence, and more by its form.
Clinging, but inherent and consubstantial to itself. And this is what the Son is in the Father: that being the case, the Son is the same as the Father. Hence, the Son is God, because this is the form, because it is of the same nature. For, since God is being, living, and understanding, and form is existence, life, and intelligence, I wish you to understand me to say this, that God is above these things. If this is so, form becomes the same as substance. For these things, having or existing, being, living, and understanding, are equally valid and the same. Thus, when there are two reasons, one by which something is, another by which it is how it is, nonetheless, as it has the same power, how and what each thing is, it necessarily becomes one reason, form being the same as substance. Therefore, if it is the same, and the form is the same, of that substance as the substance itself, for the form is substantial, the Son will be the same as the Father, or neither the Father nor the Son before proceeding forth, but one and the same alone.
This being so, since understanding and intelligence are the same to Him, intelligence is the same as life and being. But since the power of acting is greater, understanding is greater than being, than living. And since this being is to understand what it is, and this is living, understanding what it lives, necessarily, understanding, or intelligence, is God. Since God understands Himself, and when He understands Himself, not as one person understands another, it is that intelligence itself understands itself. When this happens, it makes itself be, and comes into existence, and becomes what it is to itself. And in the same way, by understanding, it exists and its own life, all of which are born from itself, or rather, existing from itself. God is unbegotten, existing from the unbegotten, which being one, are one and simple, one God, and this is like internal intelligence, which without any movement understands itself. For when it understands, it exists, and when it exists, it understands. And this is God, and certainly this is from eternity and to eternity.
But since we call the Son the image of God, for He is a generated form, that from what is being, living, understanding, existence, life, and intelligence is generated. For there is a certain form in these, through which, as through an image, it is understood what it is to be, to live, and to understand. Necessarily, God is understood through the form, for no one has ever seen God  John 1:18. Therefore, when the form of God is taken in God, it is God. But when God understands Himself, He understands Himself through the form. But the form itself must also understand. For understanding and living existence, since it understands nothing else but what these things are, is God. And I have often taught this already. But when intelligence itself understands that it is intelligence (for it necessarily follows that intelligence also understands itself), as if existing from itself, it understood itself, and made itself outside, which is outside by its own movement, by understanding itself. Hence this external intelligence, and this is the Son, this is the reason, the Son born, because He is other than God, from God nonetheless, that is, from what is existing. And living, intelligence, which is God, and inwardly by understanding itself, intelligence projected itself outwardly, and existed to the Father, in whom it also was, and always is the image existing through internal intelligence, which is being and existing, and therefore the generated image of the image.
Therefore, there are two intelligences, one existing within, which is its being, the other existing, which is its being by understanding. This one outside, this is the Son. But since by understanding itself intelligence understood God, certainly internal intelligence, and that is God, it understood also true being, and true living, and by understanding truly existed and itself true being, true living, true understanding. For He who understands one thing, and has one thing, and is one thing, according to His understanding with Himself, thus, the Son, that is, intelligence, generated by understanding itself, understood God, and all those things that are unbegotten God. And by understanding the fullness by seeking, and by understanding the fullness, hence He became the same as the Father. For since the Father is fullness necessarily, He has His place in.
Finite, albeit finite in itself:
Where it holds and contains its fullness, and in the same way,
The Son, by receiving and seeking: this is indeed
To receive space, to exist, by understanding everything that
The Father is fullness. He was begotten, and He Himself
Is whole from the whole: and because intelligence is understanding
Intelligence, since light of things is intelligence,
Light exists from light: and because intelligence
Is both, true light from true light. Also,
Since God is intelligence within, by understanding
Itself, intelligence is God from God: therefore, consubstantial
In everything, in being, and living, and understanding.
Also in that both are space and fullness:
Also in that both are image and image: for it is said
Genesis 1:26, "In our image." And in that both are light and light, and in that both are true light
And true light, and in that both are Spirit and Spirit:
And in that both are motion and motion, but the Father is motion
At rest, that is, internal, and nothing other than
Motion, not moved by motion, but the Son is moved
By motion, yet both are motion. Also, both
Are action and work, both are life, and both have life
By themselves, will and will, the same power,
Wisdom, Word, God, God and living God,
And living God, from eternity and from eternity, invisible
And invisible: for it is said by Matthew 11:27, "No one knows the Son except the Father, nor the Father except the Son,
Both together: for this signifies consubstantial, beyond
The same essence. All these can be understood by that fullness
John 16:15, "All that the Father has, He has given to me."
And, "All that the Father has, I also have." All,
He says: if all, the Son is consubstantial with the Father: Therefore the same:
And if the same, equal; and if equal, rightly did Paul speak of the Son of God
Jesus Christ Philippians 2:6, "Who, being in the form of God,
Did not consider it robbery to be equal with God."
Many divine and magnificent mysteries
Are contained here. First, that Christ is in the form of God,
In which it is shown that He has everything that God has:
For this is also said to be the image, as it is said of Him
Second Corinthians 4:4 and Colossians 1:15, "Who is the image
Of God." Therefore, God also has His image: and the Son
Is the image of God, for it is said Exodus 33:20, "No one has ever seen the face of God." And it is said Exodus 33:23, "You will see my back." Without a doubt, there is a face
For God, there is for the Son, or rather, the Son is the image of God, as
It is said, "Who, being in the form of God." Hence rightfully
It is said Genesis 1:26, "Let us make man in our image
And likeness." Therefore, the Son exists, and if another,
Exists: for the Father is not the same, the Son is not the same: in all those things
Above mentioned by me, the same, but the same means
Having the same existence of His own. Hence both
The same, and different: for here it is said, "Being in the form
Of God," indeed, it must be understood that the form is one thing,
God another. But if you look, there is a place for calumny, that
The form of God is in God Himself, so that there is one and indistinguishable
Substance. How shall we understand the following?
"He did not consider it robbery to be equal
With God." In His own existence, He placed Himself, to believe Himself
Or declare Himself equal with another. But what about that Philippians 2:7, "He emptied Himself, and took the form of a servant?" We understand
This of Christ, who died, or of God?
But no one ever said. Then when it is said of the Father,
Who raised His Son from the dead, is it not clear enough
That one is the Father, another the Son,
One is the raiser, another the raised? Therefore
The form of God. One thing is the form, another is God; and indeed,
There is a form for God, but the Son is the form of God manifestly,
But God is in secret: for thus everything both existence,
And life, and knowledge of God is inwardly in secret, but in the Son manifestly: and thus the other things, space, fullness, image,
True light, truth, spirit, motion, action,
Operation, life, and life by itself, will, power,
Wisdom, Word, God, living God, and all other things. But these are as if outwardly, and manifestly;
Those inwardly and around existence, or rather
What is existence itself: but these in active
Agent which is manifest. Finally, all these the Son
Has, but the Father gives, which is strongly expressed
In that, which...
The Son has from Himself, he says, but
he added John 5:26: "The Father gave Him to have life in Himself."
Thus, true image and existence are the same in all things,
but given by the Father: therefore both the Father and
the Son are of the same substance, but given by the Father. For from what we have said, the Father
is, lives, and understands; existence is begotten,
as life and intelligence: and this is the form of God, this is
the Son: but the Son, when He is in the Father, is one whole within,
God acting, working, using Himself, enjoying Himself, the source and
in Himself the fullness of all things.
But since, as we have taught, intelligence by the power of its
potency, necessarily while turning towards itself,
understood itself, this in a way made it double,
as if inside and outside, the Son is, begotten from the existence
of the Father: for existence is intelligence, which
is also life: appearing and existing, therefore, is God from
God. And since in any one of the three are all things,
being, living, understanding: when intelligence begets intelligence,
the Son is begotten, and the Son has all
that the Father has, and has it from the Father. Likewise, since
through all these things all things are created:
for whatever exists, receives its being, its
living, its understanding; the Son, being all these things,
as the image of the Father, and being in active act, that is,
to provide this to others according to the nature of their existence, is
necessarily the Word to all and entire things, that is,
the force and power through which what exists comes to be,
through whom God made and makes all things, and
without whom nothing is made. This is called by some active motion,
the word, reasoning power. However, since
when it operates, the Father’s force is within it, it operates within itself,
from which many things are said, so that although it is by itself that it acts,
yet it refers all to the Father, as John 6:58: "The Father sent me." And John 6:38: "I do not do my own
will but the Father's:"
And a thousand such things. Let us consider
this passage: we will find that it acts almost by itself,
as on its own will Philippians 2:6: "He did not consider equality with God something to be grasped." And again Philippians 2:7:
"He emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, who had
dominion."
All these are acts of his own will.
But it can be believed that he acts, since the Father is in him, from
which are also those John 10:28: "I give eternal life." And John 10:7: "I am the door" John 14:6, "I am the life, I am the truth." Also John 5:21:
"Just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so
the Son gives life to whom he will."
These true, these diverse, and
in all things more true, intelligence makes and the Son is in
the Father, and the Father in the Son, yet as the Father,
they are distinct and one, yet two, since
one is the Father, the other the Son: just as the Father is the
source, the Son is like the river, which flows from the source: in
the source, like water that remains, and is still, pure,
immaculate, without the appearance of bubbling, with a hidden motion
flowing more openly through different paths, affected by the qualities
and conditions of the lands it furrows, and in a way it suffers;
so also the Son, with his own water, and with his own substance, which is the Father's,
always pure, immaculate, impassible, in the regions
through which he flows, places, whether supra-celestial,
celestial, or intra-celestial, he now foams, as when encountering rocks,
which are from the kinds of souls, he flows calmly in the fields. He thus receives
passions, not in what he is substantially, but in
action and operation. For when he completed the mystery of his advent,
then he already endured passion, to empty himself,
to take the form of a servant. So also the rest,
in all of which there is act and operation.
Although also in the first act of his existence, as we have taught
in many books, there was passion from the withdrawal
from the Father, whence darkness, that is, matter followed,
not created. But this is more fully elsewhere.
Now what has been asserted, what proved?
That God the Father and the Son are of the same substance, but
also that the Father is in substance, and the Son in that substance,
but existing in Himself action, acting in action
passion existed, never separated from the Father, from
eternity both existing, and having existed, and being to come. In action, because
He is within the nature of acting, and with the Father, or in the Father
to be;
Beyond this, it is said that both inside and outside, when he acts, because the action is from the Father to him, it is said that he acts with the Father acting. Yet it is said that the Father does everything through him; that he is the Word of all things, universally of universals, of genera, of specifics, and of particulars.
And because he is of all things, both incorporeal and therefore corporeal, according to their capacity to be, so they are the Word; whence also by the ordination of the mystery in the last ages, the Word, since the shadow of all existing things was incarnated by the Holy Spirit in the Virgin Mary, he himself, whom we have shown above, the Son, in the same way to be in the body, as the Holy Spirit is in us, not entirely: for as God is everywhere, but as a part of him: for of all divine things, this part is always that which is the whole, as the soul is in bodies, as virtue and discipline in minds, or the sun or its light in the eyes.
But the Word itself, and the very one whom we have shown to be the Son, was in the body, all the Gospels declare, all the Apostles, all the Prophets. For when they predicted that Christ would come, they predicted that he would come in the flesh, indeed when they say he was seen and appeared in the flesh, as to Abraham, as to Jacob. And he himself said in the flesh
John chapter 8, verse 56:
Abraham saw my day and was glad.
And the Apostle, in this sacred and mystery-filled place, declares most clearly the Son of God before the flesh, and that he later took on flesh
Philippians chapter 2, verses 5 and 6:
Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, who, though he was in the form of God.
Certainly this was when he was before the flesh, therefore he was before the flesh and was such and so great. Form, he says, of God. What is that? Form the same as the Father. What is form? In which the Father is seen
John chapter 14, verse 9:
Whoever has seen me has seen the Father.
Certainly not in what was seen, but in that he himself is God, the divine substance, Word, life. Therefore this was before the flesh: for what does he add? He did not consider equality with God something to be grasped. Therefore he thinks of himself, and of God: he acts so that he is not equal, but was. What does he then add? But emptied himself
Philippians chapter 2, verses 7 and 8:
What did he empty? Or from where, if he was not? He further adds: And took the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and being found in human form. He humbled himself, becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross. What here does not declare in every way Jesus Christ and the Son of God?
For thus it is said
Galatians chapter 4, verse 4:
God sent his Son and sent him by his own power, and by his own will doing everything, so that he would not want to be equal, so that he would empty himself, so that he would take on the form of a servant: therefore he was the one who was the form of God, he was the one who emptied himself: and he himself is Jesus, who took on the image of a servant, and was found as a man, who submitted himself even to death, to be more fully designated Jesus Christ, even to death on a cross.
These things are sufficiently proven to faithful men, that he was before the flesh, and that the same Son was in the flesh, he who was begotten before the ages, he who ascended into heaven, and descended from there, he who is our bread from heaven: he who in the flesh says
John chapter 17, verse 5:
Father, glorify me in your presence with the glory I had with you before the world existed: certainly above the heavens, and before the flesh, he: the Word is, and
John chapter 1, verse 1:
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and through the Word all things were made, and without him nothing was made;
John chapter 1, verse 9:
He who enlightens every man coming into this world;
John chapter 1, verse 14:
He who became flesh.
You heard in the beginning, the Word, you heard that the Word himself became flesh: hear that he himself is the Son of God, and begotten of the Father, is that generation which we mentioned above. The evangelist says
John chapter 1, verse 18:
No one has ever seen God, but the only Son, who is himself God and is in closest relationship with the Father, has made him known. However, we will say better in the bosom. The Greeks say in the bosom. But whether this word, or that, signifies both the begotten Son, which is to be outside, yet to be with the Father, when it is said: Who is in the bosom of the Father. Diligent and faithful inquirer will understand that all readings are so.
I am Jesus Christ, hidden and within, conversing with souls, teaching these things, and granting understanding.
And from the Father, begotten through Christ and in Christ; since Christ is the only begotten Son, we have explained in many books.
What we have confirmed with many examples is clear enough.
In this manner and understanding, the Father and God are of the same essence with the Son, and the Son, who is life itself, is with Him.
Since Christ Himself is intelligence, the Holy Spirit is understood to be of the same essence.
Therefore, joined to the Father and Son, it is accepted that the Holy Spirit is the same as the Father in the way that the Son is the same as the Father.
Yet, just as the Father and the Son are one, the Father is also the Son, each existing in His own being, but both are one and the same substance.
Similarly, Christ and the Holy Spirit are one, yet Christ exists in His own being and the Holy Spirit in His own; but both are one substance, from which all, that is, the entire Trinity, is one.
And in the same way, the Father is joined with the Son, and the Son with the Holy Spirit.
And in this way, the Father is joined with the Holy Spirit through Christ, each existing individually as one.
The whole Trinity is, and exists as, that same essence, having one and the same substance from eternity.
This is our salvation, this is liberation, this is the full salvation of the whole man: to believe in God the Father Almighty, in Jesus Christ the Son, and in the Holy Spirit.
Amen.