
by Pietro & Girolamo Ballerini
Patrologia Latina Volume 


Chapter Six: On the Collection of Isidore Mercator.


Section One: On the spurious documents of this collection. How late the imposture was detected. Whether Pope Nicholas the First approved such a collection. The principal arguments for the forgery are presented.

The collection of Isidore Mercator is richer than preceding collections, and is especially distinguished by this characteristic: it is stuffed with numerous forged documents.
It presents numerous letters of the most ancient Roman pontiffs from Saint Clement to Saint Sylvester—popes for whom no genuine decrees exist. It also falsely attributes certain letters to other popes up to Gregory the Great, and mixes these forgeries in with authentic documents.
It is remarkable that such a massive imposture—which did not appear gradually or in parts, but burst forth all at once in a single book—was not immediately detected.
Some suspicion is believed to have arisen in Hincmar, Archbishop of Rheims, and other Gallican bishops who wrote to Pope Nicholas the First.
However, these bishops do not seem to have entertained any doubt about their falsity. Rather, they thought authority should be denied to these letters simply because, as they said, they were not recorded in the code of canons—that is, because they were not in the Hadrianic collection, which at that time was received in the usage of the churches and called the code of canons.
But Nicholas, writing back to these same bishops in his forty-second letter to the Gallican bishops, rightly believed this argument should be dismissed as worthless, since not all of the completely genuine constitutions of the Roman pontiffs, but only very few, are found in that collection. Moreover, these same Gallican bishops, whenever they see these decretals of earlier pontiffs supporting their own purposes, make indiscriminate use of them.
But since those bishops reported that these same decretal letters, though not copied into the code of canons and less widely accepted, were nevertheless not spurious but genuine—so much so that they themselves used them when it pleased them—the same pontiff, who knew of them only from the Gallican report, suspected nothing of the imposture, as long as nothing else came to light from elsewhere. Therefore he could not reject them. Nor can his words, by which he seems in some way to have approved them, be taken as true and legitimate approval, since they were based on the presumption the Gallican bishops had thrust upon him, and such approval could not be given without actually reading the letters themselves, which he lacked.
That Nicholas lacked these letters is evident from the fact that in his own epistles, where there were multiple occasions to cite them, he instead carefully quotes other documents not found in the code of canons. He even cites certain apocryphal texts—such as the synod of Saint Sylvester, another from Sessa, the acts concerning the vindication of Pope Sixtus the Third, and those concerning Polychronius—texts that had long ago been forged and published and had crept into older collections. Yet he never once used the Pseudo-Isidorian decretals.
That these decretals were also unknown to Leo the Fourth, Nicholas's immediate predecessor, is clear from his letter to the Britons. In that letter, reviewing the decretals contained in the code of canons, he begins with Sylvester and mentions the rest of the Hadrianic collection in such a way that if any business arises that cannot be resolved by them, he directs recourse to the writings of the holy fathers Jerome, Augustine, and others. He gives no indication of other published decretals.
Indeed, numerous marks of forgery are contained in these decretals and other Isidorian wares, which would easily have led attentive and expert men to detect their falsity at their very origin.
But such was the condition of those times and the periods that followed, that there were few who possessed pure knowledge of more distant antiquity, and who either wished or were able to employ sound critical method.
The first person who sensed and indicated their forgery was Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa in his work the Catholic Concordance, Book Three, Chapter Two.
For John Wycliffe, who before Cusa blurted out that 'the decretal epistles are apocryphal and lead astray from the faith of Christ, and clerics who study them are fools'—he was not trying merely to cast suspicion on the decretals forged by Isidore, but rather was striving to overthrow the authority of all decretals.
But after Cusa, gradually many others were stirred up and brought forward so many strong proofs of the forgery that no one can now reasonably doubt such impostures.
It will suffice here to sketch out some of the arguments for the forgery.
Not trivial is the evidence that emerges from the preface itself. The title is inscribed to Saint Isidore the bishop, and the formula inserted in the preface itself also declares him a bishop, since it calls bishops 'our brothers.'
But these very words of the preface show him to be Spanish: 'At the beginning of this volume we have placed how a council is celebrated among us.' After the preface is added an order for celebrating a council taken from the Fourth Synod of Toledo, Chapter Four.
Who else could this Spanish Isidore, both bishop and saint, be except the famous Saint Isidore, Bishop of Seville? That this same collection, scarcely published—that is, in the ninth century—was commonly attributed to him on the basis of this very preface is sufficiently known from Hincmar of Rheims's seventh letter, Chapter Twelve.
But what greater imposture could there be than to attribute to Saint Isidore, Bishop of Seville, a collection containing eight Toledan councils from the Fifth to the Thirteenth, and one council of Braga, all of which were celebrated after his death? And by the same anachronism, to make mention in the preface itself of the Sixth Ecumenical Council, which had not yet been held while Saint Isidore was alive?
What about the fact that in the letters attached to ancient pontiffs of the first three centuries, numerous testimonies of Sacred Scripture are read from the version of Saint Jerome, which was published later?
What about the fact that most of the consular dates appended to these same letters either cite consuls who never appear in the consular lists, or if they are found in the lists, they do not at all match the age of the pontiff who supposedly authored the letter?
Add the invented names of magistrates—archiflamens, chief flamens, and so forth—and the terms primates, archbishops, and apocrisiaries, which anyone even slightly versed in ancient history and ecclesiastical discipline will easily understand to be completely foreign to the age and usage of those ancient pontiffs.
Add that the letters contain no indication of ancient customs, but very many features of later discipline.
Others have noted quite a few other arguments more fully, which there is neither time nor need to recount here.
We believe two points alone must not be omitted, which, although separately they might admit some response, nevertheless when joined together present an evident demonstration of the imposture.
First, some of these letters are said to have been addressed to all bishops, others to all the orthodox, to all churches, to the bishops of Italy, Gaul, Spain, Africa, Germany, and so forth. Therefore many copies of them ought to have been disseminated throughout the world.
But how could it have happened that out of so many letters published throughout the world, not even one was found and cited by anyone before the ninth century?
Second, these same letters display not only the ideas but also the words and entire quite lengthy and numerous periods copied verbatim from authors of the later fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and even eighth centuries, as Father Philippe Labbé carefully noted in the margins of these same letters after David Blondel.
To the first argument it can be replied that these letters lay hidden until the ninth century, and therefore were cited by no one. To the second, some have responded that those later authors who present the indicated ideas in the same words copied them verbatim from the letters themselves.
But neither response is plausible. Indeed, one fights against the other.
For if the letters had lain so hidden from immediately after their origin until the ninth century that no one could therefore cite them, then they were not available to later writers so that they could copy passages from them.
But if entire passages from them were excerpted by many writers separated by great intervals of time and place, then they cannot be said to have been buried in darkness for a long time.
Whichever option you choose, the imposture is always convicted, and from the very conflict of the responses it shines forth much more clearly.
For if many ancient writers had taken ideas, words, and passages from the letters themselves, then the letters would have been well known, worn by frequent use, and useful for many purposes, so that they could have been cited by many—especially by those who had benefited from them. Among these, certainly the supreme pontiffs, synods, and fathers who present the same words and the same passages would have cited these letters of the most ancient pontiffs just as they are found to have cited other genuine letters of others.
But if among so many most holy and doctrinally celebrated men before the ninth century who present the same ideas in the same words in their own works, not even one has been found who mentioned these letters—because they actually took nothing from them—then the matching ideas and passages that are also found in the letters were undoubtedly derived by the forger of the letters from these same writers, which clearly demonstrates their spurious origin.
Hence they were also cited by no other author before the ninth century, not because they lay hidden or because there was no subject matter or occasion for citing them, but because the person who would forge them had not yet been born. Otherwise, just as we find them widely cited after the time when they were forged and published, and quite a few passages from them incorporated into collections, we would discover the same thing happening in ancient times as well, if they had truly been written and published by those ancient pontiffs to whom they are attributed.

Section Two: Other genuine documents inserted in the same collection, from what sources they were drawn. How important it is to discover these sources for distinguishing what Pseudo-Isidore forged. Certain genuine documents interpolated by him. The last two synods attributed to Pope Symmachus, and the chapters asserted to Pope Hadrian the First, which many believe genuine, are demonstrated to have been forged by this same Pseudo-Isidore.

Pseudo-Isidore did not construct his collection from spurious documents patched together by himself alone. Rather, he mixed many completely genuine and otherwise known monuments in with the forgeries.
The sources from which he derived these genuine documents must be uncovered, for this will help not a little in distinguishing those very things which he invented from his own brain.
The principal source is the Hispanic collection, which he inserted in its entirety into his own collection.
And since the common opinion was that Saint Isidore of Seville had been the author of the Hispanic collection, he gladly seized upon the name of Isidore—which was venerated by all—and inscribed it to his preface.
Chapter two, number eight, decrees that every year the sacred oil should be consecrated by bishops on Maundy Thursday according to apostolic tradition and the statutes of the decretals, in which the same matter is commanded. This is believed to indicate the second pseudo-epistle of Fabian. Therefore, this edition seems to have been established after the year eight hundred twenty-nine but before eight hundred thirty-six.
It is indeed remarkable that Rabanus, who shortly after eight forty-one dedicated his Penitential to Otgar (or Autcar), bishop of Mainz, produced nothing from the Isidorian forgeries. Whether he did this because he placed no trust in them, or rather because they had not yet appeared (so that the decree of the Council of Aachen would be incorrectly attributed to the pseudo-epistle of Fabian), let others judge.
But if this second option is judged more probable, and much more so if one believes with Blondel that the impostor excerpted certain formulas and phrases from the letter of Jonas of Orléans to Charles the Bald, who obtained the kingdom in eight thirty-nine, then the Isidorian collection would have to be dated as published around the time when Benedict the Levite published his books of Capitularies—namely, around eight forty-five. The first explicit mention of the forgeries is found in the letter of Charles the Bald to the bishops at the assembly of Quierzy, written in eight fifty-seven.
Nor should one be troubled by the collection attributed to Remedius of Chur and published by Goldast with this inscription: 'Canons of the ancient Alemannic Church, excerpted from the epistles of the pontiffs by Remedius, bishop of Chur, at the command of Charles the Great, king of the Franks and Alemanni' (Volume Two of the Alemannic Affairs, part two, page one hundred thirty-four, edition of seventeen thirty).
Since this king died in eight fourteen, Goldast thinks the collection itself was composed around eight thirteen. This collection was more extensive, and additions were made to it by Notting, bishop of Constance, who died in nine thirty-four.
But these additions of Notting, along with a not inconsiderable part of the canons collected by Remedius, were cut out and removed from his manuscript, as the same Goldast reports. The chapters published by him that survive are only forty-nine in number, and these display in order excerpts from only the pseudo-epistles of the ancient pontiffs from Saint Clement to Saint Urban.
But these very excerpts, which the author derived from the Pseudo-Isidorian collection compiled after Charlemagne (as we have seen), clearly demonstrate that there is an error in the title or in the interpretation of the title concerning Charles the Great, and that Remedius, who is reported as the author of these excerpts, must be assigned to a later age.
Perhaps instead of Charles the Great, we should understand Charles the Fat, who may have been called Charles the Great just as Emperor Louis the Second is found to be called Louis the Great. Charles the Fat was first king of the Alemanni (after the Pseudo-Isidorian collection had already been published), and later obtained the empire.

Section fourteen. Many proofs demonstrate that Pseudo-Isidore was not Spanish, but Franco-German.

We have learned from Hincmar's testimony that the collection came forth from Mainz and that copies were disseminated throughout Gaul. Although he was mistaken in presuming the author to be Saint Isidore of Seville and thus reporting that it had been brought from Spain, nonetheless his claim that the same collection was published from Mainz is strongly confirmed by comparing it with the testimony of Benedict the Levite.
For this reason, those who first cited these forgeries in the ninth century are Franco-Germans; none are Spaniards or writers from other regions.
Indeed, we may gather from the one hundred twenty-first epistle of Innocent the Third, book two, that the Spaniards either remained ignorant of this collection for a long time or did not accept it. From this we learn that in a certain case they presented to Alexander the Third their own codex of canons, in which the Council of Emerita was described along with other councils.
But this council, along with others, is described not in the Isidorian collection but in the fuller Hispanic collection. Therefore, the body of canons received among the Spaniards even at that time was the Hispanic collection.
The oldest Isidorian manuscripts are Franco-German, so much so that even those which were carried to other regions and reach back to the ninth century came from Gaul, as will be clear in the next paragraph regarding two Vatican manuscripts written in the ninth century.
Add to this that in the pseudo-epistles many Franco-German idioms are found, along with the same stylistic barbarisms that are detected in other Gallic and German writers of the same age. But the distinctive Spanish idioms that can be noted in Ethereus and Eulogius are completely absent.
More evident still is this fact: the impostor transcribed not a few passages from the letters of Saint Boniface, bishop of Mainz, and from the letters of Abbess Bugga to the same Boniface. These could only have been found not in Spain but in Mainz and Germany, where they lived and worked.
Finally, there is added what seems to us the weightiest argument of all. When the impostor inserted the Hispanic collection into his own, he did not use manuscripts of Spanish origin, but those of Gallic origin.
This became known to us when collating the epistles of Saint Leo. For we consulted two manuscripts of the Hispanic collection: Vienna manuscript forty-one, of Spanish origin, and Vatican manuscript thirteen forty-one, of Gallic origin.
We have already noted the striking variety in readings between these manuscripts in chapter four, number thirteen. In the Vienna manuscript the readings are indeed corrupt, but the very errors approach the true reading; whereas in the Vatican manuscript there are manifest arbitrary emendations that depart from the authentic text.
To this Vatican manuscript, which came from Gaul into the Vatican library, we recognized three other Gallic manuscripts cited by Father Coustant as completely similar in readings and emendations. From these it is clear that such manuscripts found and disseminated in Gaul originated from some studious Gallic antiquarian who once copied and emended a corrupt Spanish manuscript. See what we have noted on this matter in the place cited.
Moreover, we have collated these same epistles of Leo with the edition of Merlin that came forth from an Isidorian manuscript, as well as with other Isidorian manuscripts, and especially with Vatican manuscript six hundred thirty, which among Isidorian manuscripts is the most ancient of all and, being contemporary with Pseudo-Isidore, contains a purer version of his collection.
But the readings of these manuscripts, while they differ greatly from the readings of the Vienna manuscript of Spanish origin, represent exactly the same readings and emendations that are found in Vatican manuscript thirteen forty-one of Gallic origin. And this was so evident that when we compared the Isidorian manuscript Vatican six thirty with the Hispanic manuscript Vatican thirteen forty-one in the same Leonine epistles, one appeared to have been copied word for word from the other.
Therefore, there should be no doubt that Pseudo-Isidore, when inserting documents from the Hispanic collection into his own, employed a manuscript not of Spanish origin but of Gallic origin.
Why so? Because he compiled his collection in Gaul, where such manuscripts existed, and not in Spain. Who then, after so many and such manifest proofs, could still doubt that the author was Gallic, or Franco-German?

Section five. On the Isidorian manuscripts. The order and catalog of documents from this collection, taken from the most ancient of all manuscripts, Vatican six thirty. Spurious, genuine, and interpolated texts are carefully distinguished.

Section fifteen. Since manuscript codices of the Isidorian collection are quite common in libraries, yet most of them differ so much among themselves, many have doubted what the original collection actually contained.
For many manuscripts present only the decretal epistles and lack the canons of the councils, which nevertheless are clearly stated in his preface to have been inserted by Pseudo-Isidore into his collection.
Among these, some contain more epistles, others fewer, and some even occasionally differ in their order. Those that present the canons along with the epistles do not always agree.
For some are more extensive in their epistles, which they either insert within the Isidorian texts or add at the end. We have been able to find thirteen manuscripts, of which five lack the canons of councils and generally disagree both in the number and order of the epistles.
Such are the manuscripts Vatican six twenty-nine, thirty-seven eighty-eight, thirty-seven ninety-one, forty-eight seventy-three, and Vallicellana D thirty-eight. But manuscripts containing both epistles and canons—of which Father Coustant was unable to find even one—we had eight available: Vatican six thirty, six thirty-one, and thirteen forty; Vatican Ottobonian ninety-three; Casanatensis A eleven and fourteen; the Florentine manuscript of the Dominicans of San Marco, number one eighty-two; the Paduan manuscript one hundred of the Lateran Canons of San Giovanni in Viridario; and the Venetian manuscript of the Ducal Library of San Marco, divided into two volumes numbered one sixty-eight and one sixty-nine.
Of these, however, some are incomplete, lacking certain epistles at the beginning or end.
Section sixteen. So that amid such great variety of manuscripts one may discern what truly was the Pseudo-Isidorian collection, or what documents were included in its original form, light will be shed by these words from his preface, in which he describes the outline and summary and order of the documents in his collection.
The preface states: 'At the beginning of this volume, we have set forth how a council should be celebrated among us, so that those who wish to follow our order may know how this ought to be done. But those who choose to do this in a better way, let them do what they judge by just, canonical, and most wise counsel.'
The preface continues: 'Moreover, because of their authority we have placed before the other councils the canons which are called Apostolic, although they are said by some to be apocryphal, since many receive them, and the holy Fathers have strengthened their decrees by synodal authority and have placed them among the canonical constitutions.'
The preface continues: 'Then we have inserted the decrees from certain letters of the apostolic men, namely those of Clement, Anacletus, Evaristus, and of the other apostolic fathers whose letters we have been able to find up to this point, down to Pope Sylvester.'
The preface continues: 'Afterward we have placed the Nicene synod because of the authority of that great council. Then we have arranged the various councils of Greeks and Latins, whether those held before or those held afterward, distinguished by their chapters and arranged under numbers and chronological order, within the scope of this volume.'
The preface concludes: 'We have also added the remaining decrees of the Roman bishops down to Saint Gregory, and certain letters of his, in which the authority is not inferior to that of councils, given the eminence of the apostolic see.'
Therefore, those manuscripts which first, after the preface, present the order of celebrating a council, then bring forth the canons of the apostles, then the letters of the apostolic men or early pontiffs from Saint Clement to Saint Sylvester, then Nicaea with the other Greek and Latin councils, and finally the other letters of subsequent pontiffs down to Saint Gregory—these manuscripts, I say, are to be considered as containing the true and complete Isidorian collection.
We have found that two manuscripts are completely of this type: Vatican six thirty and six thirty-one, which are entirely complete.
Three others—Vatican Ottobonian ninety-three, the Florentine San Marco manuscript, and the Casanatensis—although they present both the decretal epistles and the canons of councils, are nevertheless incomplete and cannot provide knowledge of the entire collection.
Another manuscript, Vatican thirteen forty, and the two Venetian San Marco manuscripts, add many documents after Saint Gregory which cannot be attributed to Pseudo-Isidore and must be classified as later additions, about which there will be discussion in the following chapter.
The Paduan manuscript one hundred of San Giovanni in Viridario, although complete but of a later age, we did not have time to examine thoroughly.
Therefore, from those two complete and pure Isidorian manuscripts, Vatican six thirty and six thirty-one, which we examined more thoroughly, we shall present below a description of the entire Isidorian collection. Concerning the others, we shall add some remarks afterward.
Between these two complete Vatican manuscripts, in the sequence and order we shall chiefly follow manuscript six thirty. For this one must certainly be preferred to all others, since it is not only Gallic—that is, from the very region in which this collection was compiled—but is also praised by Montfaucon and Cardinal de Aguirre as the most ancient of all.
Two things prove it is Gallic: first, the notation written at the beginning in a later hand: 'This book belongs to the use of John, bishop of Arras'; second, the letter of Luitard of Vienne to Wenilo of Rouen.
But that it is most ancient and contemporary with Pseudo-Isidore himself is shown by the catalog of Roman pontiffs, which ends with Leo the Fourth, Benedict the Third, and Nicholas the First. From this it is recognized that this manuscript was written under Nicholas the First, that is, between the years eight fifty-eight and eight sixty-seven—precisely the time when documents from this collection began to be cited by Hincmar and other Gallic bishops.
Therefore, this same manuscript should be considered one of the first exemplars of the same collection. This is confirmed again and again by two appendices of certain documents which Pseudo-Isidore added in later revisions; in this example of the original collection they were added at the end, whereas in other manuscripts they are found inserted in their proper places.
Therefore, everyone can see how much deference should be given to this manuscript above the others in establishing and describing the same collection.
Section seventeen. Before the collection itself, besides the catalog of Roman pontiffs which we noted ends with Nicholas the First, there is a note about the four general councils. This is found in Gratian's Decretum, distinction fifteen, canon one, and is taken from Saint Isidore of Seville's Origins, book six, chapter sixteen.
Then follows a note about six councils, as in the same Gratian, distinction sixteen, canon ten. Then another note about twenty-one other councils, of which the first eight are Ancyra, Neocaesarea, Gangra, Sardica, Antioch, Laodicea, Carthage, and the African council, which follow the series of the Hadrianic collection. But the other thirteen are Gallic, with none Spanish—which indicates that this note was composed in Gaul.
The same list exists in Gratian, distinction sixteen, canon eleven, where however three other Gallic councils are added, thus completing the number to twenty-four.
Then in the manuscript, after the mention of the Council of Mâcon proposed as number twenty-one, eight other numbers are added from twenty-two to twenty-nine, which however are left empty.
Then follow another eighteen numbers from thirty to forty-seven, in which are indicated the Hispanic councils and others, which are listed with the same numbers in the table of councils to be recited shortly.
There is appended a notice of provinces, which Andreas Scotus, Peter Bertius, and Emmanuel Schelestratius have made public; and afterward a notice of the Gauls, which has been published by many.
All these annotations and notices exist not only similarly in Vatican manuscript six thirty-one and other examples that contain the complete Isidorian collection, but also in Vatican manuscript thirteen forty-one of the Hispanic collection of Gallic origin. Therefore, there can be no doubt that either they were transferred from some such example of the Hispanic collection into Isidorian manuscripts, or from Isidorian manuscripts into those codices of the Hispanic collection.
But all these things that precede and do not pertain to Isidore's collection are closed by the aforementioned letter of Luitard, bishop of Vienne, to Wenilo of Rouen, written in the year eight sixty-eight, which is unique to Vatican manuscript six thirty and was published from it in volume ten of the Councils, Venetian edition, column fourteen hundred three.
Section eighteen. After these preliminary matters, the Isidorian collection begins with the preface under this title: 'Here begins the preface of Saint Isidore the bishop. Isidore Mercator, servant of Christ, to his fellow-servant the reader and parent in the Lord: greetings in the faith.'
It continues: 'I am compelled by many,' and so forth. It was published from Vatican manuscript six thirty by Cardinal de Aguirre. See volume one of the Councils, page four. Merlin omits 'Mercator' and has 'faithful one' instead of 'in the faith.'
The common editions of the Councils substitute 'sinner' for 'Mercator,' which none of our manuscripts present. 'Mercator' is also read in the Paris manuscript which Harduin saw, as well as in Ivo's Decretum; and only in the margin of Ivo's work appears 'sinner.'
To the preface is added the spurious letter of Aurelius to Damasus, which begins 'The glory of the apostolic see,' as well as the apocryphal response of Damasus, 'The writings of your holiness,' and so forth. See these in volume two of the Councils, columns ten eleven and ten twelve.
In Vatican manuscript six thirty-one these are written before the preface, but incorrectly. For Hincmar of Reims, in his work against Hincmar of Laon, chapter twenty-four, when citing the response of Damasus to Aurelius, says that 'Isidore placed it under his preface and placed it before his collection.'
Afterward follows the Order for Celebrating a Council: 'At the first hour of the day,' and so forth, as in volume one of the Councils from column eight to column twelve. This order, which was taken from the Fourth Council of Toledo, the author had promised in his preface to place at the beginning of his collection.
Then is presented a table of councils with forty-seven titles, of which the first forty-five are those which we displayed in the Hispanic collection in chapter four, number five. But the other two are these: Forty-six, Decrees of certain Roman bishops established for the rule of faith and ecclesiastical discipline. Forty-seven, Synod of Toledo with sixty-eight bishops.
This same table with the same forty-seven titles also exists in the Casanatensis manuscript A eleven, as well as in Vatican thirteen forty-one containing the Hispanic collection of Gallic origin; and therefore it crept from one source into the other.
Certainly the two titles forty-six and forty-seven, which agree neither with the body of the Hispanic nor with that of the Isidorian collection, are recognized as additions. Indeed there is an error in title forty-six, which does not express any council but is that very title in the Hispanic collection prefixed to the second part, which contains the decretals of the apostolic see.
There are added two other spurious letters: one of Saint Jerome to Damasus, which begins 'The glory of your holiness,' and so forth; the other of Damasus to Jerome, which begins 'The Church rejoices in your fountain,' and so forth.
These were published by Henschenius, Schelestratius, and others; most recently they were inserted in the Appendix to the Works of Saint Jerome, volume eleven of the Veronese edition, page two seventy-five.
Since these are also found in certain manuscripts of the Roman Pontifical ascribed to Damasus which Pseudo-Isidore used, it cannot be determined whether the forgery of these letters had Pseudo-Isidore himself as author, or some earlier forger from whom he received them.
Next, the fifty canons of the apostles in the Dionysian version are copied from the Hadrianic collection.

Then follow the letters of the early pontiffs from Saint Clement to Miltiades, all spurious and all fabricated by Pseudo-Isidore, with the exception of only two of Saint Clement, which however he interpolated. Here is their series, which may be found in the published editions of the Councils.

Five letters of Saint Clement: two to James, the third to all bishops and presbyters and so forth, the fourth to Julius and Julian, the fifth to those dwelling in Jerusalem with Bishop James.
The first two had already been fabricated by some Greek author and translated into Latin by Rufinus, and had passed into older Italian and Gallic collections.
Only the second letter is inscribed in Italian collections as 'The Precepts of Saint Peter,' under which title we shall publish it in this volume among the documents of ancient canon law. But in the Gallic manuscripts indicated by Hardouin and Coustant it is inscribed: 'Letter of the precepts of Saint Clement the pope sent to James the brother of the Lord,' or 'Letter of Saint Clement of Rome to James concerning the sacraments of the Church.'
Pseudo-Isidore excerpted these two letters from Gallic collections, from which he retained the inscription in the second letter. But the three other letters he forged himself.
But to those two spurious letters which he received from elsewhere, he added new forgeries when he expanded them with lengthy interpolations. Anyone can recognize these interpolations if they compare the same letters as published from the Isidorian collection in the Councils with those much shorter versions that are brought forth from Rufinus' translation and from older collections in this very volume: the first in the collection to be presented in chapter sixty-four, column four fifty-four; the second among the documents cited a little earlier, number five, column six seventy-four.
Three letters of Saint Anacletus: the first to all Easterners, the second to the bishops of Italy, the third to all bishops. Two of Saint Evaristus: one to the bishops of Africa, the other to the Egyptians. Three letters of Saint Alexander the First: the first to all the orthodox, the other two to all bishops.
Two letters of Saint Sixtus the First: the first to all Christians, the second to all bishops. One of Saint Telesphorus to all Christians. Two letters of Saint Hyginus: one to all Christians, the other to the Athenians.
Likewise two of Saint Pius the First: the first to all Christians, the second to the Italians. One of Saint Anitius (for Anicetus) to the bishops of Gaul. Two of Saint Soter: the first to the bishops of Campania, the second to the bishops of Italy.
One of Saint Eleutherius to the provinces of Gaul. Two letters of Saint Victor the First: one to Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, the other to the Africans. Two of Saint Zephyrinus: the first to the bishops of Sicily, the second to the bishops of Egypt.
Two of Saint Callistus the First: one to Bishop Benedict, the other to the Gallic bishops. One of Saint Urban the First to all Christians. Two of Saint Pontian: the first to Felix of Succribonum, the second to all Christians.
One of Saint Anterus to the bishops of the provinces of Baetica and Toledo. Three of Saint Fabian: the first to all bishops, the second to the Easterners, the third to Bishop Hilary. Two of Saint Cornelius: one to all bishops, the other to Bishop Rusticus.
One of Saint Lucius the First to the bishops of Gaul and Spain. Two of Saint Stephen the First: the first to Bishop Hilary, the second to all bishops. Two of Saint Sixtus the Second: the first to Bishop Gratus, the second to the bishops of Spain.
Two of Saint Dionysius: one to Urban the prefect, the other to Bishop Severus. Three letters of Saint Felix the First: the first to Bishop Paternus, the second to the bishops of Gaul, the third to Bishop Benignus.
Two of Saint Eutychian: the first to the bishops of Baetica, the second to the bishops of Sicily. One of Saint Gaius to Bishop Felix. Two of Saint Marcellinus: one to Bishop Solomon, the other to the bishops of the East.
Two of Saint Marcellus: the first to the bishops of the province of Antioch, the second to the tyrant Maxentius. Three of Saint Eusebius: the first to the bishops of Gaul, the second to those of Egypt, the third to the bishops of Tuscany and Campania.
One of Saint Miltiades to the bishops of Spain. In this first part, which pertains to the early pontiffs from Saint Clement to Miltiades inclusive (or exclusively, up to Saint Sylvester), Pseudo-Isidore forged fifty-nine letters, and he included and interpolated two that had been previously attributed to Saint Clement.

Section nineteen. The part that presents the councils follows. There is prefaced a work entitled 'On the Primitive Church and the Nicene Synod.'

Since this work is placed after the letters of Miltiades, it is cited by Gratian and others under the name of that same pontiff. But in the manuscripts it lacks a name. It is, however, like a preface by Pseudo-Isidore himself to the following constitution. It begins: 'No one who reads the divine Scriptures,' and so forth, as in volume one of the Councils, Venetian edition, column fifteen sixty-two.
There is added the Constitution of Constantine to Sylvester: 'In the name,' and so forth. 'Those things which our Savior and Redeemer,' and so forth. In the same place, column fifteen sixty-four. This document is apocryphal.
Some attribute this to Pseudo-Isidore. Balsamon recites certain Greek fragments of it. But Father Possin found the complete document written in Greek in Vatican Greek manuscripts six fourteen, folio seventy-six; seven eighty-nine, folio one eighty-five; nine seventy-three, folio thirty-nine; and fourteen sixteen, folio one twenty-seven, as Father Labbé noted.
From this, Baronius and Binius not improbably suspected that this constitution was fabricated by Greeks, and afterward rendered into Latin and taken up by Pseudo-Isidore.
Indeed, it is found in Latin in the Gallic collection which the ancient Colbert manuscript thirty-three sixty-eight presents in first place. See what we said in part two, chapter eight, number three.
Although this document seems to be an addition in that collection, nevertheless since the same Colbert collection is older than Pseudo-Isidore and has received nothing Isidorian, it is quite credible that he drank this document from this source, or perhaps from another older Gallic collection.
There follows: 'At what time the Nicene council was held. The canons of general councils began from the times of Constantine,' and so forth, and it ends with the words 'they handed down the second creed after the apostles.' This is the beginning of the preface of the Hispanic collection, which we gave in full in chapter four, number five.
There begins the letter or preface of the Nicene council: 'To the most blessed Sylvester, bishop of the apostolic see in the city of Rome,' and so forth. This is the preface taken by Pseudo-Isidore from the collection published in this volume. See column twenty-two.
Afterward are copied the canons of the councils of Greece: Nicaea, Ancyra, Neocaesarea, Gangra, Sardica, Antioch, Laodicea, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, as well as the Formula of Atticus.
Likewise the canons of eight councils of Africa: seven of Carthage and of Milevis. Then the canons of the councils of Gaul: three of Arles, Valence, Turin, Riez, Orange, Vaison, Agde, and Orléans.
Finally, the canons of the councils of Spain: Elvira, Tarragona, Gerona, Zaragoza, Lérida, Valencia, and the first, second, third, and fourth councils of Toledo; the beginning of Braga One, which is interrupted by the insertion of nine other synods of Toledo from five to thirteen. The last of these, which is incomplete at the end in Merlin's edition, is read complete in Vatican six thirty and other Isidorian manuscripts.
Afterward, the synod of Braga One is again added, but complete; and immediately Braga Two. Then the chapters of Martin of Braga, and the Council of Braga of the year six seventy-five; and finally two synods of Seville.
All these things Pseudo-Isidore took from the fuller Hispanic collection of Gallic origin, such as is in Vatican manuscript thirteen forty-one, with the same repetition of Braga One and with the same readings freely emended, as we noted earlier.
Only in the Nicene council, after the creed, is the catalog of bishops omitted, which is read in the same manuscript of the Hispanic collection.

Section twenty. The third part follows, which presents the letters of the other Roman bishops from Saint Sylvester to Saint Gregory. The same preface is placed before these, 'Having arranged the councils thus far,' and so forth, which we presented in the Hispanic collection in chapter four, number six.

But the first document that is produced is spurious. There begin certain excerpts from the synodal acts of Saint Sylvester the pope: 'In the times of Saint Sylvester the pope and Constantine the most pious Augustus, a great council was held at Nicaea,' and so forth, as in volume one of the Councils, from column fifteen seventy-five to the words in column fifteen seventy-eight, 'let it be designated in writing.'
But since in the edition of the Councils these excerpts are followed by the synodal acts of Saint Sylvester themselves with the title 'Canon, or Constitution of Sylvester,' from which Pseudo-Isidore plucked these excerpts, these acts too, which are equally spurious, are reported as woven into the Isidorian collection in that place.
But although they are read in some Isidorian manuscript, they are nevertheless absent from our manuscript and the others we have consulted. Indeed, he would have undertaken useless labor in arranging excerpts from those same acts if he had thought the acts themselves should be inserted into his collection.
Hincmar of Reims mentions finding only these excerpts in his manuscript as well, in the often-cited work against Hincmar of Laon, chapter twenty-four, where he also rejects such acts as apocryphal.
Moreover, since they were composed under the time of Symmachus along with other apocryphal documents and were inserted into certain Italian collections and also passed into Gaul (as they are read in the ancient Colbert manuscript seven eighty-four, concerning which see part two, chapter six, numbers four and five), Pseudo-Isidore must be said to have derived these excerpts from some such Gallic exemplar.
Furthermore, there is no doubt that he also had before his eyes the Roman Pontifical inscribed with the name of Damasus, whose author presents the same synodal acts of Saint Sylvester in summary. For certain passages of Pseudo-Isidore's excerpts agree more with the Pontifical's abbreviation than with the acts themselves.
The spurious letter of Athanasius and the other Egyptians to Pope Mark, in which they request a copy of the Nicene canons; and the response of Mark to them, likewise spurious. See volume two of the Councils, columns four eighty-eight and four ninety.
The faith treated in the sacred Roman council by the most blessed Pope Julius and the other bishops of the true faith: 'In the name of the Lord God and Savior,' and so forth. In the same place, column five forty-nine. This too is a Pseudo-Isidorian forgery.
The letter of the same Pope Julius to the Easterners on behalf of Saint Athanasius: 'It would have been fitting for you, brothers, to instruct others in ecclesiastical disciplines,' and so forth. In the same place, column four ninety-seven. It is apocryphal.
The response of the Easterners, likewise apocryphal: 'Although concerning all,' and so forth. In the same place, column five oh two. The rescript of Julius to the same Easterners: 'It would have been fitting for you against the holy Roman and apostolic Church,' and so forth. In the same place, column five oh six. Apocryphal.
The synodical letter of Athanasius and the Egyptians to Pope Liberius, apocryphal: 'The rights of your most blessed fatherhood,' and so forth. In the same volume two of the Councils, column eight seventeen. The rescript of Liberius to them, likewise spurious: 'Long ago and from the beginning,' and so forth. In the same place, column eight nineteen.
The letter of Athanasius and the Egyptians to Pope Felix, apocryphal: 'We suggest to your holy apostolate,' and so forth. In the same place, column nine ninety-three. The response of Felix: 'Your sacred synodical letter,' and so forth. In the same place, column nine ninety-nine. Another of the same to them: 'Grace to you,' and so forth. In the same place, column ten oh five. Both spurious.
The letter of Liberius to all bishops: 'There is nothing that can stand,' and so forth. In the same place, column eight fifteen. Apocryphal.
Damasus to Paulinus: 'Through my son Vitalis,' and so forth. In the same place, column ten fourteen. This genuine letter of Damasus is taken from the Hispanic collection.
Afterward, Pseudo-Isidore took another genuine letter of the same Damasus to the same Paulinus from the Hispanic collection (which is elsewhere inscribed 'Confession of Faith to the same Paulinus') and cut it into three parts, and among these he interwove three apocryphal letters. A table of six chapters is placed first, to which correspond the three parts of the genuine letter and the three spurious letters placed after the table, in this manner:
First, of the same Damasus to Paulinus: 'After the Nicene council, another was later gathered in the city of Rome,' and so forth, as in volume two of the Councils, column ten sixty-one, up to these words: 'If anyone thinks rightly about the Father and the Son, but does not hold correctly concerning the Holy Spirit, he is a heretic.'
This is the first part of the aforementioned letter, or confession of faith, to Paulinus; except that there is omitted at this point the decree against those who migrate from their churches to others—which is added below under title six.
Second, the letter of Stephen and three councils of Africa to Damasus: 'We make known to your blessedness,' and so forth. In the same place, column ten eighteen. It is spurious.
Third, that all heretics who think wrongly about the Son of God and the Holy Spirit are found in the perfidy of Jews and gentiles: 'But if anyone allows God the Father and God the Son and the Holy Spirit to be called gods,' and so forth.
This is the last part of the aforementioned genuine letter to Paulinus. In the same place, column ten sixty-three. But after the final words 'let us believe without doubt,' in the Isidorian manuscript are added certain other things which are not read in the pure exemplars of the Hispanic collection.
Fourth, the letter of Damasus to Prosper of Numidia and other Africans: 'Although, dearest brothers, these things are known to us,' and so forth. In the same place, column ten twenty-five. Apocryphal.
Fifth, concerning priests who migrate from their churches to others: 'But those priests who go from church to church,' and so forth. In the same place, column ten sixty-two, up to the words 'may he rest in the Lord.'
This is the decree from the aforementioned genuine letter of Damasus to Paulinus, which had been omitted earlier.
The synodical letter of Damasus to the bishops of Illyricum: 'We believe your holy faith,' and so forth. This is taken from the translation of Epiphanius in the Tripartite History, book five, chapter twenty-nine, to which Pseudo-Isidore added a spurious chronological notation: 'Given on the seventeenth day before the Kalends of November, in the consulship of Siricius and Ardaburius, most noble men.' See volume two of the Councils, column ten thirty-one.
The apocryphal letter of Damasus to the bishops of Italy: 'I had hoped, most beloved,' and so forth. In the same place, column ten thirty-three.
Three letters of Siricius, all genuine from the Hispanic collection: one to Himerius, another to various persons against Jovinian, the third to the orthodox throughout various provinces. In the same place, columns twelve twelve, twelve eighteen, and twelve twenty-three.
Two spurious letters of Anastasius: the first to the bishops of Germany and Burgundy, the second to Nerianus, a most noble man. In the same place, columns fourteen twenty-eight and fourteen thirty.
Twenty-three letters of Innocent, all genuine, excerpted from the Hispanic collection, which are read in volume three of the Councils, from epistle one of the same pontiff to twenty-three, column thirteen and following.
The letter of the Council of Carthage to Innocent, and Innocent's rescript. Then the letter of the Council of Milevis to the same pontiff with his rescript. Likewise the familiar letter of five African bishops to Innocent himself, and his response. Finally, the familiar letter of Innocent to Aurelius.
These seven letters are read in the Gallic collection printed in this volume, from which Pseudo-Isidore drew them. See below from column one twenty-eight to one sixty-four.
Two letters of Zosimus taken from the Hispanic collection: one to Hesychius, the other to the clergy of Ravenna. They are found among the letters of Zosimus in volume three of the Councils, epistles one and two.
The letter of Pope Boniface to the Emperor Honorius with his response, and another of the same pontiff to the bishops of Gaul. They are genuine, taken from the Hispanic collection. They are found in the same volume three of the Councils among the letters of Boniface.
Three letters of Celestine, likewise from the Hispanic collection: one to Venerius and other Gallic bishops, another to the bishops established throughout the province of Vienne and Narbonne, the third to the bishops of Apulia. In the Councils these are epistles one, two, and three of this pontiff.
One apocryphal letter of Sixtus the Third to the bishops of the East. It is in volume four of the Councils, epistle three.
From the Hispanic collection there are then added in exactly the same order thirty-nine letters of Saint Leo and others, which we enumerated in the description of the Hispanic collection in chapter four, number six.
Three documents of Pope Hilary from the same Hispanic collection: namely, a synodal decree and two letters to Ascanius of Tarragona. They are in the Councils, epistles one, two, and three.
The letter of Pope Simplicius to Zeno of Spalato, and the letter of Acacius to Simplicius, from the same collection. The former is in the Councils as epistle one of the same pontiff; the latter is after epistle eight.
Three letters of Felix the Second (Felix the Third in Pseudo-Isidore) from the same Hispanic collection: one to the Sicilians, another to Acacius, the third to Zeno of Spalato. In the Councils, epistles seven, six, and eight.
The decree of Pope Gelasius concerning books to be received or not received, which begins: 'After the prophetic and evangelical Scriptures,' and so forth, as in volume five of the Councils, column three eighty-six.
This genuine decree was copied from some older Gallic collection or manuscript, such as Colbert seven eighty-four, about which we spoke in part two, chapter six, and another Colbert manuscript thirty-three sixty-eight, about which we spoke in the same place, chapter eight.
Another general decree of the same pope, which is elsewhere inscribed 'Letter to the bishops of Lucania and Sicily.' Likewise another letter of the same to the Sicilians. These two, excerpted from the Hispanic collection, are read in volume five of the Councils, epistles seven and ten.
Four letters of the same Gelasius: the first to Faustus the master, the second to the Emperor Anastasius, the third to the bishops of Dardania, the fourth to the Easterners. These were taken from the Gallic collection printed in this volume, chapters forty-eight, forty-nine, fifty, and fifty-one.
The letter of Pope Anastasius to the Emperor Anastasius, from the Hispanic collection. It is found in volume five of the Councils, epistle one among those of the same pontiff.
The letter of Pope Symmachus to Caesarius of Arles, likewise from the Hispanic collection. In the same place, epistle five among the letters of Symmachus.
There are added three genuine councils under the same Symmachus from the Hadrianic collection, which in volume five of the Councils are inscribed as synod one, three, and four.
In most Isidorian manuscripts there are inserted at this point two other synods under the same pontiff, which we have proved to be fictitious, as well as another genuine one taken from Ennodius. But in Vatican manuscript six thirty these are relegated to the end of the collection, about which we shall speak further below.
Eight letters of Hormisdas, and two to Hormisdas, in the same order as we designated them in the Hispanic collection, from which Pseudo-Isidore derived them.
Two letters of Pope John the First: one to Archbishop Zachary, the other to the bishops of Italy. They are spurious.
Two other letters of Felix the Third (Felix the Fourth in Pseudo-Isidore), likewise spurious: the first to all bishops, the second to Sabina.
The letter of Boniface the Second to Eulalius, apocryphal. The apocryphal letter of John the Second to Bishop Valerius. The letter of Agapetus the First to Bishop Anthemius of Constantinople, likewise apocryphal.
The letter of Bishop Amator to Pope Silverius, and his response: both spurious.
The genuine letter of Vigilius to Profuturus, taken from the Hispanic collection; but in Pseudo-Isidore it is inscribed to Euterius on account of a corrupt reading, concerning which see chapter four, number fifteen.
To this letter he added from his own work two chapters, the sixth and seventh.
The letter of Pelagius the First to Bishop Vigilius (in Vatican six thirty-one, to Julius), spurious. The decrees of Pope John the Third to the Germans and Gauls, likewise spurious.
The apocryphal letter of Pope Benedict to Bishop David. Three letters of Pelagius the Second: one to the bishops of the synod of Constantinople, the second to Archbishop Benignus, the third to all bishops especially of Campania and Italy—all apocryphal.
Six letters of Saint Gregory the Great. The first three are genuine, taken from the Hispanic collection: the first and second to Leander, bishop of Seville, and the third to King Recared. These are read in book one of the Register, epistle forty-three of the Maurist edition, and in book nine, epistles one twenty-one and one twenty-two.
Afterward are added three other letters of the same Gregory, which could have been taken either from his Register or from other Gallic collections. One to Secundinus, which is found in book nine, epistle fifty-two, but in Pseudo-Isidore it is interpolated with a long addition, which however we shall see was fabricated by another, earlier impostor in part four, chapter eight.
Another to the patrician Theoctista, which is found in book eleven, epistle forty-five; the third to Augustine, which presents his questions and Gregory's responses, as they are read in the same book eleven, epistle sixty-four.
A synod under the same Gregory the Great with six canons, up to the words 'desires to undergo servitude,' as it is found in volume six of the Councils, column thirteen ten.
The decrees of Pope Gregory the Younger. This is the Roman synod printed in volume eight of the Councils, column one eighty-five. With this synod the original Pseudo-Isidorian collection ends.
Furthermore, in Vatican manuscript six thirty, from which we have drawn this description of the collection, a blank page follows, which confirms that the same collection ended with the aforementioned synod, so that what is added after that same page in the same manuscript must be reckoned as a later addition.

But there are added in the same handwriting as the entire manuscript the following documents, which pertain to the case of Pope Symmachus.

The apologetic pamphlet of Ennodius for the Roman palm synod and for Symmachus. See volume five of the Councils, column four seventy-nine.
Synods five and six under the same Symmachus, which we proved spurious in number seven above. They are found in the same place, columns five oh one and five oh nine.
Two letters of Ennodius attributed to Symmachus: one to Laurentius of Milan, which begins 'The movement of a religious conscience comes forth.' It is read in the works of Ennodius, but with the title: 'Third speech of Ennodius given to Stephen, vicar of the Apostolic See, to be spoken to Bishop Maximus.'
The other to the patrician Liberius, which in the same Ennodius is epistle one of book five.
Moreover, since these documents, especially the two spurious synods, are attributed to Pseudo-Isidore and are found inserted in other exemplars of the Isidorian collection after the three genuine synods of Symmachus, these seem to have been added by Pseudo-Isidore in later revisions. And therefore they are written at the end of the aforementioned manuscript Vatican six thirty, which in the preceding folios contains the original collection devoid of these documents.
After such additions, in the same manuscript another blank and empty page is left; and then the following items are added in the same handwriting.
The chapters ascribed to Pope Hadrian and handed over to Angilramnus, bishop of Metz. There are fifty-two chapters, to the last of which are immediately attached another nineteen chapters.
These, which were published in volume eight of the Councils, column five ninety-nine, we demonstrated in number eight above to be spurious and composed by the impostor after his first production.
The disputation between the Emperor Constantius and Liberius, Roman pontiff: 'The Emperor Constantius said,' and so forth, as in the Tripartite History, book five, chapter seventeen.
Certain decrees collected here and there from the acts of the Council of Chalcedon, which we also find in other collections.
Concerning the transfer of bishops, from book twelve of the Tripartite History.
chapters eight and eleven. Another selection from the letter of Pope Pelagius: That a bishop ought not to transfer from one city to another.
This is the end of the manuscript. The chapters falsely attributed to Hadrian the First, which appear in other Isidorian manuscripts that insert the pseudo-synods of Symmachus in their proper place, are placed after the decrees of Gregory the Younger and are believed to belong to Isidore's collection, since they are found only there and in works derived from the Isidorian tradition.
Certainly the forgery of these chapters displays the characteristic methods of Pseudo-Isidore, and we have observed that they were excerpted from the same forged letters composed by him, so that the same artificer of all these works becomes apparent.
However, since Pseudo-Isidore wrote in his preface that he would append the decrees of Roman bishops not all the way to Hadrian but only to Saint Gregory, we must conclude that these chapters did not belong to his original production but were fabricated by the same author later on. For this reason they are rightly listed separately among the additions in our manuscript.
Vatican manuscript six hundred thirty-one, which once belonged to Cardinal Peter, Bishop of Rouen, written in the twelfth century, contains everything that is in Vatican six hundred thirty, with the exception of the two final additions concerning the transfer of bishops and the selection from Pope Pelagius's letter.
Only the ordering is changed in some places: the additions pertaining to Symmachus are described in their proper place after the three genuine synods of that pontiff, while the chapters of Hadrian are then appended with the rest after the decrees of Gregory the Younger without any indication that they are additions.
What is unique to this manuscript, however, is that after the Isidorian collection it adds the entire Hadrianic collection and the version of the Sixth Council under Pope Agatho.

Section Six: Concerning certain manuscripts that contain the Isidorian collection in a form that is not entirely pure or complete. Certain apocryphal letters wrongly attributed to Pseudo-Isidore.

We have explained thus far what constitutes the pure and complete Isidorian collection. Now we must discuss certain manuscripts that present it with additions foreign to the collection itself, or in a form that is not entirely complete.
First we encounter Vatican Ottoboni manuscript ninety-three, a parchment folio written in very ancient small characters and divided into two columns, dating from the ninth or tenth century.
That it was once French is made clear by the parchment attached at the end to protect the manuscript, which contains a document of the French Bishop of Paris and Thomas of Courcelles, professor of sacred scripture and Dean of the Church of Paris, under Pope Pius the Second.
This manuscript presents at the beginning the letters of the early pontiffs, then the canons of councils, and afterward the decrees of subsequent prelates of the apostolic see—that is, the Isidorian collection itself.
But since it lacks both beginning and end, it does not provide the collection in entirely complete form. This deficiency is supplied by two other manuscripts: Casanatensis of the Preaching Fathers of the Minerva, marked A eleven, fourteen, and Vatican thirty-seven ninety-one.
The former contains completely intact the letters of the early pontiffs and the canons of councils, while the latter has the decrees of subsequent pontiffs all the way to the end. Thus these manuscripts agree with the aforementioned Vatican Ottoboni manuscript in their respective portions, so that what is missing from it, whether at beginning or end, can safely be supplied from them, as if the Ottoboni manuscript had been divided into two parts that are contained in those two manuscripts.
Father Coustant saw similar Isidorian manuscripts that lacked only the canons of councils. He notes that a double index of chapters was prefixed to them: one at the beginning before the letters of the early pontiffs, which also lists the canons of councils even though they were omitted from those manuscripts, and another before the letters of the later pontiffs.
We have found these indexes only in the aforementioned copies: the first indeed in the Casanatensis manuscript (since Vatican Ottoboni is mutilated at the beginning), and the second in Vatican Ottoboni and in the other Vatican thirty-seven ninety-one.
Moreover, in his manuscripts he found certain pseudo-letters falsely attributed to Damasus, Jerome, and Leo, which we have been able to find inserted together only in our aforementioned manuscripts. Therefore we have recognized with much greater certainty that Father Coustant's manuscripts are plainly similar to ours.
Furthermore, he attributed these same pseudo-letters, just like the other forgeries, to Pseudo-Isidore, because having found only these Isidorian manuscripts, he believed they contained the pure Isidorian collection.
We, however, who have had the opportunity to examine manuscript Vatican six hundred thirty, the most ancient and complete of all, and other similar manuscripts presenting the pure Isidorian collection, have recognized through comparison with these that the aforementioned copies do not contain the collection in entirely pure form.
As regards the first part, which comprises the letters of the early pontiffs and the canons of councils, those manuscripts can indeed be called pure Isidorian, since they present the documents of this same part in the same order that we noted in Vatican six hundred thirty.
Only this part, as we learned from the complete Casanatensis manuscript, begins with the preface of Isidore, omitting the annotations and notices that precede the preface in Vatican six hundred thirty, which in the manuscripts we are discussing are relegated to the end after the conclusion of the second part, as we discovered from manuscript Vatican thirty-seven ninety-one.
Afterward follows an index of seventy-seven chapters which, although absent from the pure Isidorian copies, nonetheless corresponds exactly to the Isidorian documents. The first thirty numbers are assigned to as many pontiffs from Saint Clement up to Miltiades, whose letters are copied in this same part. The remaining forty-seven numbers are those pertaining to councils divided into that many sections, as we have seen elsewhere.
In the second part, however, which concerns the letters of the later pontiffs, the divergence of these manuscripts from the pure Isidorian ones is not slight.
Two considerations argue that the index of chapters prefixed to this part, which is found only in these manuscripts, cannot be attributed to Isidore. First, because it lists fewer letters than are contained in the Isidorian collection.
For example, of Gelasius's seven letters it indicates only two, and of Symmachus's four documents only one. Moreover, the table in the Casanatensis manuscript ends with Anastasius, while that in Vatican Ottoboni manuscript concludes with Hormisdas, whereas the Isidorian collection, as the author himself testifies, extends all the way to Gregory.
Second, because the ordering of letters seen in that index agrees neither with the order in other Isidorian manuscripts nor with that of Vatican Ottoboni manuscript itself or of the other Vatican thirty-seven ninety-one.
In the actual body of these manuscripts, moreover, the letters not only fail to correspond to the prefixed index but also diverge from the Isidorian collection, and from this divergence especially we cannot consider this to be the genuine collection of Isidore.
First of all, the ordering of the letters—for example, those of Saint Leo—is not Isidorian. For Pseudo-Isidore transferred thirty-nine letters of Leo from the Hispana collection into his own in exactly the same order in which they are copied in the Hispana, as Vatican manuscripts six hundred thirty and six hundred thirty-one and others prove.
Hence the author of that augmented Isidorian collection, which we shall describe in the following chapter, likewise retained this same order. For although he inserted many additions, he nevertheless preserved the letters copied from Isidore in the same order he found in the Isidorian manuscripts.
But in the manuscripts of which we are currently speaking, an altogether different ordering of Leo's letters is introduced, and the same confusion of order exists also in the letters of Innocent and others.
Then under Damasus at numbers fifteen and twenty-two, the confession of faith he sent to Paulinus is cited twice, which begins with the words 'After the Council of Nicaea.' It is read only once in the pure Isidorian copies.
Moreover, in Leo's letter to the Africans it is presented in an augmented form in which certain chapters are appended that were omitted from the Hadrianic edition, whereas Isidore gave a different, abridged form from the Hispana. See our note on that letter number twelve.
Add finally that several letters are adjoined, partly genuine and partly spurious, which are lacking in the pure Isidorian manuscripts.
Thus among the letters of Damasus three are inserted (in volume two of the Councils, column one thousand seventeen), of which two are apocryphal: one from Damasus to Jerome beginning 'Since there are many bodies of books,' and another, Jerome's response beginning 'As a supplicant I read the letters of your apostleship.'
The third, however, is from Damasus without title, beginning 'Since reverence is owed to the apostolic see.' This one is genuine, rendered into Latin from Greek, inserted by Epiphanius Scholasticus into the Tripartite History, book nine, chapter fifteen, where it is reported as having been sent to the Easterners.
Among the letters of Leo, eighteen are additions, and among these, letter twenty-eight to Flavian is copied twice from different sources. Nor is there lacking the apocryphal letter that we relegated to the appendix of the first volume concerning the privilege of chorepiscopi or presbyters to all the bishops of the churches of Germany and Gaul—
which we learn was forged earlier, from the letters of John the Third fabricated by Pseudo-Isidore himself, in which this same letter of Leo is cited.
Moreover, after Saint Gregory's letters are added 'Sayings from the Letters' excerpted from various places, namely from various letters of Saint Gregory the Great.
and after the chapters of Hadrian three items are appended. First, a letter of the pope, the bishop of Spalensis—that is, Saint Isidore of Seville—to Laudefridus of Cordoba, which Loaisa published from a Spanish manuscript and which is reproduced from Loaisa in volume seven of the Councils, column four hundred thirty-four.
Second, another letter of Isidore to Bishop Maso concerning the restoration of priests, which is believed to be spurious by Jean Morin in his work 'On Penance,' book four, chapter fifteen, number six.
Third, a catalog of the names of heretics who disturbed the unity of the Church. It begins 'Certain heretics also,' and so forth, as in Gratian's Decretum, cause twenty-four, question three, chapter thirty-nine. It is taken from book eight of the Etymologies of Saint Isidore of Seville, chapter five.
These last additions, which are absent from Vatican Ottoboni ninety-three because that manuscript is mutilated at the end, became known to us from manuscript Vatican thirty-seven ninety-one, in which this second part is preserved intact.
Does not this manifold divergence of such manuscripts from the other older and purer Isidorian copies demonstrate that the pure collection of Isidore is not found in them?
Nor should anyone suspect that the additional documents, especially those three apocryphal ones we mentioned, were added through later efforts of Pseudo-Isidore.
This is sufficiently refuted especially by manuscript Vatican six hundred thirty, in which, since the later additions of this same Pseudo-Isidore are found described in a double appendix at the end, we cannot doubt that those additional documents from the aforementioned manuscripts would have been appended there with the rest if they had been added by the same Pseudo-Isidore as author.
Therefore the three forged letters—one from Damasus to Jerome, another from Jerome to Damasus, and another from Leo to the bishops of the Germanies and Gaul—are incorrectly attributed to Pseudo-Isidore,
since they are absent from the pure Isidorian manuscripts and are found only in those that diverge in many respects from the pure Isidorian collection and have received certain additions from elsewhere.
Pseudo-Isidore was not the only fabricator of apocryphal texts; many others of the same character have been discovered.
But to pass over certain older impostures, the letter of Pope Deusdedit to Gordianus, Bishop of Seville, together with three others cited in it—from Julius, Innocent, and Celestine to the bishops of Isauria, Ephesus, and Jerusalem—reveals an obvious forgery. Yet since it is not found in any manuscript of Isidore, it cannot be attributed to this artificer.
The same is true of certain other fabricated writings, which will be discussed in the additions to Isidore in the following chapter.
The Florence manuscript of Saint Mark numbered one hundred eighty-two, written around the twelfth century and containing both letters and canons, diverges somewhat from the pure Isidorian collection in its final part.
For after the letters of Innocent it adds the law of Emperor Constantius to Volusianus and Volusianus's own edict concerning the case of the Pelagians, which are read in the collection of canons to be published in this volume, chapters nineteen and twenty.
Then in Leo, besides an order different from the Isidorian manuscripts, it presents several letters that are lacking in those manuscripts. And letter twelve to the African Moors it presents not in abridged form as they do, but complete and exactly copied, such as has not been possible to find in any other collection.
See the preface to the letters of Leo, section fourteen, where we have enumerated the twenty-four letters that are copied in that manuscript.
However, since letter twenty-four lacks its ending because the manuscript is damaged, we do not know whether other letters of Leo would follow, or whether anything else different from Isidore's collection would be inserted among the other pontiffs.
More would need to be said about manuscript Vatican thirteen forty and about two similar ones in Venice at Saint Mark's, numbers one hundred sixty-eight and one hundred sixty-nine, which in the final part of the Isidorian collection likewise contain very many documents, partly inserted and partly added at the end. But since these matters are more extensive, they must be treated separately in the following chapter.
Vatican manuscript six hundred twenty-nine, from the twelfth century, in folio format, prefixes before the Isidorian collection certain short works of Saint Isidore of Seville and the Ecclesiastical History of Rufinus.
There follows the preface of Pseudo-Isidore. Then an index of chapters with this title: 'Here begins the summary of the canons of the apostles and of the first apostolic men from Saint Clement up to Saint Damasus, following their proper order, whose deeds also preserved in this work are contained under their respective chapters.'
It says 'up to Damasus' because after the canons of the apostles, all the letters of the Isidorian collection from Saint Clement to Damasus are copied in continuous series, with the intermediate canons of councils omitted, as well as the treatise on the primitive Church and the Synod of Nicaea.
But among the remaining pontiffs, the weary scribe omitted much and added little.
For he gave only one letter of Siricius to Himerius, one spurious letter of Anastasius to the bishops of Germany and Burgundy, one of Innocent to Decentius, one of Zosimus to Hesychius, the letter of Boniface to the Emperor Honorius and his response, one of Celestine to the bishops of Gaul beginning 'the words of the apostolic precept,'
one apocryphal letter of Sixtus the Third to the Easterners, only three of Leo—to Rusticus, to Anastasius, and to Nicetas—one of Hilary to Ascanius of Tarragona, which in the Councils is letter two of that pontiff, all excerpted from Isidore.
He added two of Simplicius that are lacking in Isidore: one to John, Bishop of Ravenna, and another to Bishops Florentius, Equitius, and Severus, which in the Councils are letters two and three of that pontiff and appear to be excerpted from the Hadrianic collection.
Next from the same collection are added the decrees of Felix in synod under Flavius Boethius, honorable man and consul, and so forth, as in volume five of the Councils, column two hundred seventy-five. In Isidore only the letter inserted in that synod and addressed to the Sicilians is read.
But afterward from Isidore only one other letter of the same Felix is brought forward, the sixth to Acacius, one of Gelasius to the bishops of Lucania, the first council of Symmachus, only one letter of Hormisdas, number twenty-five, to the bishops of Spain,
one spurious letter of John the First to Archbishop Zacharias, and finally one of Felix the Third, also called the Fourth, to bishops of various provinces, which in Isidore is complete but here is read with the preface shortened, for it begins with the last sentence of that preface: 'The writings of your holiness which to the apostolic see,' and so forth.
Moreover, before the letters of each pontiff his own eulogy is prefixed from the Roman Pontifical attributed to Anastasius the Librarian. And although after the aforementioned Felix no constitutions of subsequent pontiffs are copied in the same manuscript, nevertheless eulogies of all are provided up to Hadrian.
There follow ten chapters of Gregory the Seventh, beginning 'Whosoever of soldiers or of any order or profession holding ecclesiastical properties,' and so forth, as in the Roman council celebrated in the year ten seventy-eight.
Then the order concerning the discernment of penitents, which Pope Gregory established. The canons assign to sinners for certain sins three years of penance, one of these on bread and water, for certain sins five years, and so forth. The ending is 'that we may attain eternal life.' This order we have found nowhere else thus far.
The final document is the synod of Pope Urban the Second held at Piacenza in the year ten ninety-five, which is found in volume ten of the Councils, column eight hundred twenty-four.
Vallicellian manuscript D thirty-eight, from around the tenth century, with the canons of councils omitted, contains the letters of the Isidorian collection from Saint Clement to Damasus, as in the preceding manuscript.
Besides the preface of Pseudo-Isidore, it also has the short work on the primitive Church. It appends the letters of Nicholas the First in the case of Rothad, Bishop of Soissons, which are read in the edition of the Councils.
The manuscript concludes with the letter of Pope Vitalian to Paul, Archbishop of Crete, which in the councils is letter one of that pontiff.
Two manuscripts—Vatican thirty-seven eighty-eight from the eleventh century and forty-eight seventy-three from a later period—present the same Isidorian letters from Saint Clement to Damasus. Afterward they append certain materials from Saint Gregory the Great that are not found in Isidore.
Two Isidorian manuscripts held at Padua in the library of Saint John in Viridario, marked with numbers one hundred and one hundred fifty-nine, have received various materials foreign to Isidore, which we have not had leisure to record in our notes.
Nor do we doubt that there are other manuscripts elsewhere, differing by various omissions or additions. But from the careful description we gave in section five of the pure Isidorian collection, anyone can easily understand what is Isidorian and what is an addition or omission.