Therefore, the truth of both the paternal and maternal nature believed in the Only Begotten God to fullness, and the dual substance in the one person of Christ preserved with natural properties, the Son is rightly and truly said to be equal to the Father and lesser, rightly and truly proclaimed to be coeternal and subsequent, rightly and truly declared always born, and born in time, and always unchanging and changed in time.

Thus, the Son is equal to the Father, because He always has this from the Father. He is also lesser than the Father, because He temporally received this from the Virgin. Therefore, just as the Son is rightly said to be equal to the Father when humanity, through which He is lesser than the Father, is not recognized in Him: so the same Son is wrongly said to be lesser when the unity and equality of divinity with the Father is denied in Him. We say, therefore, the Son is naturally equal, and we say He is lesser. We say He is equal according to the form of God, born; according to the form of a servant, humbled. We say He is equal to the Father, in whom we know He was born without beginning from the Father; we also say He is lesser, because when the fullness of time came, God sent His Son made from a mother, made under the law.

Galatians
 4:4.

Therefore, just as we undoubtedly proclaim Him born, so we also proclaim Him made. For we say He was born without beginning from the heart of the Father, we say He was made in time by the work of the Trinity. For His own Son, from His own nature, the Father begot, and from the nature of the virgin, He made. However, whatever He made, He made with the cooperation of the Son and the Holy Spirit. Therefore, the Father alone indeed begot His own Son, but He did not make Him alone. For in the Only Begotten Son, the eternal generation of the Father alone, and in the same Son made, is the one operation of the whole Trinity. Indeed, the Only Begotten God, Creator of man, was made man, and the same one who made woman from man was made man from woman. 

Hence it appears that the testimonies which he brought forth impiously from the Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles, and Solomon, do not take away the unity of the paternal nature from the Son, but show the sacrament of the divine incarnation. Knowing this most certainly, John the Baptist said: This is He of whom I said: After me comes one who is ahead of me.

John
 1:15.

Proclaiming the truth of this sacrament, the apostle Peter said: Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ.

Acts
 2:36.

Indeed, he rightly said made, whom he proclaims crucified. For the Only Begotten God, incomprehensible and immortal, made by no one, and the eternal maker of all things, deigned to become Christ by His own work, so that He could be crucified by the work of the Jews: because the cross could not bear the Redeemer of the world handed over, unless the womb of the virgin had given birth to the Maker of the world. Therefore, also through Solomon, hinting at the truth of His generation and creation, He said: The Lord created me at the beginning of His ways in His work.

Proverbs
 8:22.

But before He said this, He clearly foretold the sign of His future incarnation, saying: If I declare to you the things that happen daily, I will recall the things that are from the beginning.

Proverbs
 8:21, according to the Septuagint.

Enumerating further, He added: The Lord created me at the beginning of His ways in His work. This creation is certainly from the beginning, not before the beginning. For afterward, He says, He founded me before the ages; and a little later: He begot me before all the hills. Here, when He says before the ages, and before all the hills, He wanted us to understand the eternity of His divine birth. Both before the ages, and after the age is eternity. And thus the eternity of the Son of God before the age has no beginning, just as His eternity after the age has no end. Thus, putting past time for the future time, Wisdom says, The Lord created me, instead of He will create me; and thus He said it as if it were already done which was certainly to be done: just as through blessed David He said: They have pierced my hands and my feet; I can count all my bones. They gaze and stare at me. They divide my garments among them and cast lots for my clothing.

Psalm
 22:16-18.

Therefore, saying The Lord created me, He shows how He was made. Also saying, They have pierced my hands and my feet, He shows how He was made.

He will be crucified.

Just as it was certain to happen, as the Son of God sang about His passion through David, it was also certain to happen, as He, who is the wisdom of God, prophesied about His incarnation through Solomon.

For Solomon himself said a little earlier: "Wisdom has built her house, and set up seven pillars" (Proverbs 9:1), which pertains to the birth of the Lord's incarnation.

Isaiah also speaks about Christ's passion in such a way that he declares what will happen as if it has already happened.

For he says about Christ: "He was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so He did not open His mouth" (Isaiah 53:7).

For the very birth of the Only Begotten of God from the Virgin, according to the flesh, is sometimes predicted as future and at other times spoken of as if it were past.

For instance, in one place he says: "Behold, a virgin will conceive and bear a son" (Isaiah 7:14).

In another place, indicating it as already done and past, he says: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given" (Isaiah 9:6).

Who then cannot see that all that was said concerning the humanity and passion of the Only Begotten of God by the prophets was truly destined to happen at that time, just as now it is truly past?

To show the unchangeability of the divine plan, it happened that prophetic Scripture spoke of what was expected in the future as if it had already occurred in speech.

For God, about whom the prophet says here, "Who made the future" (Isaiah 45:11, according to the Septuagint), wanted to narrate what had to be done as if it was already done because He established what happens in time with the unchangeable eternity of His disposition.

Therefore, even in those things where the work has not yet been completed, the arrangement of the Creator remains firm in eternity.

Thus, the Son of God, though He was to be created with His work, said He was created, just as He did not hesitate to say He was crucified, even though He was to be crucified.