When I read your letter, dearest son Victor, filled with the sweet fragrance of faith and love, I took great pleasure and joy in reviewing it. I found the subject you intended for me to refute, the discourse of Fastidiosus. Upon reviewing it, I was deeply saddened by his loss and even more compelled to detest his blasphemy.

We know that after embracing the Christian faith, the monastic profession, and the honor of the priesthood, which he took in the sight of men but did not maintain before the Lord, he turned away from the path of truth and completely forgot his redemption. He became a servant of fornication and lust and thus rejected the service of divine majesty. Hence, he turned from being a Catholic to a heretic, and from the evil treasure of his heart, he brings forth evil.

Against the true faith, against Catholic truth, he spews that discourse, intoxicated with the poison of impiety, when he rejects the bread of life and, by the indication of his name, disdainfully casts away the nourishing food of true faith. In that profane discourse, calling us Homousians, as the Arians usually call us, he said these words: 

"The Homousians," he said, "asserting that the Trinity is inseparable and indivisible, neither considering the Son to be lesser than the Father nor the Father to be unbegotten, the creator of His Son."

Please consider, in these words of Fastidiosus, some things are so wrongly stated that they can never be rightly asserted; some things are so impiously said that they could be rightly stated and heard if only piety were present. That he thought he could accuse us of, for saying that the Trinity is inseparable and indivisible, he stated so wrongly and impiously that no one could ever state it rightly. For who does not see with what great impiety the Arians assert a separable Trinity?

The blessed Apostle says about us: 

"Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?"

(Romans 8:35)

And a little later:

"I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord."

(Romans 8:38)