Therefore, the entire Trinity did not take on flesh, nor did the entire Trinity feel the injuries of the Passion, nor did the entire Trinity rise from the dead on the third day, nor did the entire Trinity ascend into heaven on the fortieth day.

But, as I showed above, only the Son took on flesh, in whom the unconfused property of both natures remains. This is why He is the same one who, according to true divinity, remained completely impassible. For that divinity naturally suffers nothing, just as it is naturally unchangeable. The nature that is changeable is subject to suffering. Therefore, no suffering could happen to that nature to which natural change could not belong.

Only the Son lay in the tomb, but that nature of the Only Begotten God could be buried, which could die. According to the nature of the flesh, the Only Begotten God lay buried in stone, according to which He was nailed to the cross with nails. How could His divinity be confined in the tomb, which neither the earth can confine, nor heaven?

Therefore, the unity of the person made that passion and that burial to be one in Christ, of divinity and flesh. But the property of each substance in Christ made only the flesh of Christ naturally subject to suffering and death, with the divinity remaining impassible and immortal.

Christ, therefore, who is not the Trinity, but one person of the Trinity, truly hung on the cross according to the truth of the flesh, and truly lay dead in the tomb, with the Apostle saying that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that He was buried, and that He rose from the dead on the third day according to the Scriptures.

All of these things, according to the unity of the person, the whole Christ endured, but according to the natural property, they pertain only to the truth of the flesh. Thus, according to the soul alone, He descended into hell. For at the same time that is found between the death of Christ and His resurrection, the same Christ, according to the truth of the flesh, truly lay in the tomb, and according to the truth of the rational soul, truly descended into hell.

And thus, according to the truth of human nature, from the time Christ, hanging on the cross, bowed His head and gave up His spirit, until He rose from the dead after receiving His spirit back, He was not in the same place according to the flesh and the soul. According to the flesh, He truly lay dead in the tomb; according to the rational soul, He descended into hell; but according to the divinity, by which He is one God with the Father and the Holy Spirit, He filled the entire creation.

Therefore, according to the flesh, He was in the tomb alone, but according to the soul, He was in hell alone. According to the divinity, which is confined by no place but is found ineffably everywhere, He did not abandon His flesh in the tomb, nor did He forsake His soul in hell, just as He can never be absent from the earth or heaven.

The same Son of God, who lay in the tomb according to the flesh and descended into hell according to the soul alone, because He had said about His soul: I have the power to lay it down, and I have the power to take it up again. 
 The Lord Jesus, after He had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven and sat at the right hand of God

All these things, which were done temporally in the Only Begotten God, partly according to the soul alone, partly according to the flesh alone, and partly according to the soul and flesh together, are rightly referred to the one person of divinity and humanity in the Son of God, but they cannot be referred to His divine substance in any way.

Therefore, none of these things can be attributed to the person of the Father or the Holy Spirit, because the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are not one person. Nor can anyone attribute the passion or assumption of flesh to the Father or the Holy Spirit, because it is blasphemous to proclaim the divine nature changeable or passible in any way, according to which Christ is always born without beginning.

He was incomprehensible when he allowed himself to be understood.

He was impassible when he felt the injuries of suffering.

He was immortal when he succumbed to death.

He was indivisible when, according to the flesh, he lay in the tomb, and according to the soul, descended to the lower parts of the earth.

He was immense when he ascended to the heights of heaven from the humility of this earth.