So, to return to what I was discussing, in the very image of God, that is, in the very mind of man, thought, which is born and shaped from memory, and is rightly called the word, takes on only a physical voice so that it can be heard by physical ears.

Thus, in that holy and divine Trinity, only the Word of the Father, which is the Mirror without blemish and the Image of God’s goodness 
 (Wisdom 7:26), namely, the brightness and the figure of His substance 
 (Hebrews 1:3), when He was in the form of God, did not consider equality with God something to be grasped; but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant 
 (Philippians 2:6).

Therefore, only the Son took on flesh so that He could be seen by physical eyes and touched by hands; only He took on human nature in such a way that He made it His own, and through it, mercifully infused the knowledge of His divinity. Yet, in revealing Himself, He certainly revealed the Father in Himself. By granting the knowledge of His divinity, He also granted the knowledge of the Father.

For the divinity that is one with the Father and the Son makes it so that the Son cannot be known without the Father, and the Father cannot be known without the Son. Hence, He said: "Have I been with you for so long a time, and you have not known Me? Philip, whoever has seen Me has seen the Father" 
 (John 14:9).

Thus, the Son, who alone took on flesh, naturally showed the Father in Himself by the unity of divinity; just as a speaker, while speaking the truth that he remembers, indicates what is brought forth from himself, showing what is stored within his mind.

But that physical voice with which the spiritual word is clothed, so that it is brought to the knowledge of the listeners, comes simultaneously from memory, thought, and will; but it is received only by thought, that is, the inner word, so that the inner thought proceeds to the physical ears of those present.

However, that word, just as it is received in the form of a physical voice and goes out entirely to the listeners, is found entirely in the heart along with memory and will spiritually.

Therefore, whoever sees this image in the mind of man will quickly ridicule the empty talk of heretics, who, thinking carnally about spiritual matters, refuse to believe that in that holy Trinity anything was done by the three that was only taken up by one person by divine disposition: although that human nature was indeed made by the work of the whole Trinity, it was taken up into the unity of the person by the Son alone.

For just as it is certain that "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" 
 (John 1:1); so it is certain that "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us" 
 (John 1:14).

But what did we receive? The Word of the Lord and God with whom the Word was, not the Father and the Son.