When baptism is given in the name of the Trinity, it unites all the faithful into one body. As the blessed Apostle says, "We are one body in Christ, and individually members of one another" 

Romans
 12:5.

The multitude of believers also had one heart and one soul through love, which is poured into our hearts by the Holy Spirit who has been given to us.

It clearly shows how great the impiety is to say that the Trinity itself is separable, when indeed any creature is separated from God not by place, not by time, but only by sins.

Hence God says about some people: "This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me" 

Matthew
 15:8.

And yet He says: "I am a God who is near, and a God from afar. Can a man hide himself in secret places so that I do not see him? Do I not fill heaven and earth?" 

Jeremiah
 23:23-24.

David himself says: "Behold, those who are far from you will perish" 

Psalm
 73:27.

And to show what it means to be far from God, he added, "You destroy all who are unfaithful to you."

Therefore, one departs from God with the heart, and one approaches Him with the heart.

For it is clear that God is entirely everywhere, but is contained by no place.

For God is a spirit, creator indeed, not created, the unchangeable maker of all bodies and all spirits, eternal, immense, just, and good.

He never departs from any of the things He made by the immensity of His nature.

For it cannot happen that God is absent in power to anything that has its being from God.

And yet, through mercy and judgment, by which the Church never ceases to sing to Him 

Psalm
 100:1, it is not inappropriate to say that He is present to the faithful and far from the unfaithful.

For as it pertains to nature, because everything that is created, whether corporeal or spiritual, was made by the Holy Trinity alone, that is, one God, who is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, with one will, one operation, one power, one benevolence, and one omnipotence.

Just as the Father fills all creation with power, not with bulk; so the Son fills all, so the Holy Spirit fills all.

For the Trinity does not fill all creation in such a way that the Father fills part, the Son part, and the Holy Spirit part, nor is all filled by the Father alone, nor by the Son alone, nor by the Holy Spirit alone.

For who would dare to think of the Trinity, that is, of one God, in this way, not to say foolishly, but indeed sacrilegiously; since the power and divinity of God must be naturally immense just as it is naturally eternal?

But men given to carnal senses cannot think of God except carnally.

And they think that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit can be separated from each other as men are separated from each other; who, as they are distinguished by the manner and quantity of each one's body, must thus be separated by places.

But while such men roll their souls in the mud of the flesh, creating phantasms for themselves, and weighed down by the burden of vanity, the more they are occupied with thoughts of those things which present a bodily mass to their bodily eyes, the less they can ascend to understand divinity.

Nor do they heed the command from the Lord God through the holy 

Isaiah
, not to think of Him in the same way we think of the creatures, which we know were made by Him; because He does not think as we men think.

Hence 

Isaiah
 says: "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways my ways, says the Lord: for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts" 

Isaiah
 55:8.