Thus, the name of the Word shows the distinct person of the Father and the Son: but because He was God, it teaches the one substance of the Father and the Son.

Therefore, the flesh that belongs to the Word alone is not of the Father nor of the Holy Spirit, because the Word of God does not share one personhood with the Father and the Holy Spirit. According to the common operation of divinity, in which there is a trinity of persons, as the Son received it, so did the Father and the Holy Spirit.

For it was fitting that the Son, who is naturally born from the Father alone according to divinity, should be born naturally from the Virgin according to the flesh. But in that Trinity, just as there are not two Fathers nor two Holy Spirits, so there will not be two Sons. For that Trinity has one Father, one Son, and one Holy Spirit.

But one Father and one Holy Spirit according to divine nature; and one Son, according to both divine and human substance. Therefore, the Trinity is distinct in persons, although in nature the one divinity of the Trinity is not divided or separated.

Hence, humanity is found assumed in the person of the Son alone. Because of the nature, the operation of the holy Trinity is always one; but because of the persons, the assumption of humanity belongs to the Son alone.

However, while we discuss these matters for the instruction of the faithful, we must also consider the heretics, who are undoubtedly carnal and animalistic, and therefore incapable of spiritual matters, about whom the Apostle says: "But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God. For they are foolishness to him, and he cannot understand them because they are spiritually discerned" 
First Corinthians
 2:14.

The apostolic authority indeed testifies that heretics are especially carnal or animalistic. For blessed Paul places heresies among the works of the flesh. Likewise, the blessed Apostle Jude calls those who separate themselves from the Church "animalistic," saying: "These are the ones who cause divisions, worldly-minded, devoid of the Spirit" 
Jude
 19.

This is indeed what we showed that blessed Paul said: "But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God." Therefore, it is not surprising that those who do not have the Spirit of God cannot understand divine things. For it is written in the Book of Wisdom: "Who can know your counsel, unless you give wisdom and send your Holy Spirit from above?" 
Wisdom
 9:17.

Hence, the holy Apostle also asserts that the things of God are revealed only by the Holy Spirit, saying: "For to us God revealed them through the Spirit" 
First Corinthians
 2:10. And a little later he says: "Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, that we might know the things that have been freely given to us by God" 
First Corinthians
 2:12.

However, it is good that we too, as much as we are divinely helped, strive to become all things to all people, so that we might win all, imitating the blessed Apostle 
First Corinthians
 9:20.