Sermons and Refutations on the Trinity
The original sermon by Fastidiosus the Arian
and the refutation by Fulgentius of Ruspe
Sermon of Fastidiosus the Arian
We say, very wise brothers, what the divinity deigns to bestow upon our smallness. God is the author of justice and life; indeed, He is our justice and our life. He did not create man for sin or death. As Scripture says,  "God did not make death, nor does He delight in the destruction of the living"  (Wisdom 1:13).
So what then?  Death happened to the man whom God had made. It is not said to be the work of the Creator, but of the deceiver, the devil. After man was deceived by the devil, he, who willingly committed iniquity, unwillingly fell into death: he transgressed unjustly, and was justly punished.
God, seeing these two things in man, guilt and death, one which he had done badly, the other which he had justly suffered; with these two very strong chains man was held bound. He commanded that the Lord Christ should take on flesh,  not in which He would become a sinner in debt, but in which, without the debt of sin, He would undeservedly endure death for debtors. Not so that the Son of God would be bound by the chain of iniquity, but so that the sinful man would be freed from the chain of iniquity. This is what the Apostle says, "The great mystery of godliness, which was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen by angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, taken up in glory" (First Timothy 3:16).
And truly, most learned Christians, what greater kindness could there have been than that the Son of God, obeying the paternal command,  should take on human flesh for carnal men, and endure death for mortals with life? And He who was born before the ages,  founded by the Father, should be born from a Virgin in the last time? He who gives life to the world should lie dead in a tomb? How many tears should now be shed, or how much affliction of the heart should be mourned, that many still refuse to abandon the hardness of their stubbornness, while indiscriminately desiring to serve harmful inclinations.
They do not comply with healing remedies, or reject the will of correction, opposing their contrary hands to life-giving words as to medicinal tools. Thus they wound themselves from where they should have been healed and turn the power of spiritual medicines against themselves. Thus they increase the rot of their wounds from where they could have attained health.
A twofold error crept in long ago, which, binding the souls of the lost until now, does not allow them to breathe to seek the truth. The Homousians assert the inseparable and indivisible Trinity, neither the Son being lesser than the Father, nor the Father being the creator of His Son; the Donatists also proclaim that the good are polluted by the communion of the wicked, while they cast far away the gift of healing salvation of the holy Scripture.
Among them, the holy mother Catholic Church is known to chant with Davidic murmur, as we have sung in the present psalm: "Lord, lead me in Your justice because of my enemies"  (Psalm 5:9). For I am led in Your justice, while I believe in You, Almighty God, unbegotten and uncreated, the creator of Your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, as testified by John the Baptist: "After me comes a man who ranks ahead of me"  (John 1:11). And Peter the apostle preaching and saying: "Let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ"  (Acts 2:36). Solomon also previously declaring from the person of Christ: "I was established before the ages"  (Proverbs 8:23). Behold, Scripture testifies that He was made, created, and established, whom sacrilegious people detest believing in this way.
Again, they assert the inseparable and indivisible Trinity, as said above. And if the Son, of whom the evangelist says: "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us"  (John 1:14), with His divinity's power briefly obscured, alone entered the chamber of the Virgin's womb, He was undoubtedly separated from the Father and the Holy Spirit. But the Trinity could not at all be separated from one, which evidently cannot be divided in any way, according to their absurdity. Therefore, the entire Trinity took on flesh, the entire Trinity felt the injuries of suffering, the entire Trinity lay in the tomb, the entire Trinity descended to the underworld, the entire Trinity rose from the dead on the third day, the entire Trinity ascended to the heavens on the fortieth day? And at whose right hand does the entire Trinity...
And at whose right hand does the entire Trinity...
Is he sitting?
Or which Spirit did the entire Trinity send to the apostles on the day of Pentecost?
Or to which God could the entire Trinity in heaven say: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me" Psalm 22:1?
Or to which Father did the entire Trinity say: "Father, into your hands I commend my spirit" Luke 23:46?
If they can, let them declare.
But if they cannot say, they destroy themselves with their own arrows, who contend that the Trinity is inseparable.
For the vanity of the Donatists does not consider that the benefit of baptism was given to humans for this reason: that those who are burdened by others' errors from the beginning, relieved by the help of healing grace, might henceforth bear only their own burdens.
Nor was it the communion of the sacrament, but the consensus of sin that would condemn each one.
Because just as the Lord said He would repay the sins of the parents to the third and fourth generation, because earthly and carnal birth is shown to be subject to original sin: so in another place, as He testifies that both the soul of the father and the soul of the son are His, the second and heavenly birth is known to be completely free from others' sins.
For immediately it follows: "The soul that sins shall die" Ezekiel 18:20.
To this sentence Solomon's admonition agrees, showing that one is not burdened by another's sins: "My son," he says, "if you are good, it will be for yourself and your neighbors; but if you become evil, you alone will bear the evil" Proverbs 9:12.
Therefore, the Catholic faith, fleeing from the precipices of every error, and, with the Lord leading, proceeding on the path of heavenly journey, declares with sober belief: "Lord, lead me in your righteousness because of my enemies" Psalm 5:8.
And then asking the Father through the Son for the Holy Spirit, in the righteousness of the path, by whose free gift the ability to walk is obtained, it acknowledges that those not yet baptized are subject not only to their own sins but also to those of others, whom it knows to be conceived in iniquity.
But it asserts that those washed in the water of birth are free from others' iniquity if the consent of the will is not held in crime.
For as many as believed in Him, says John the Evangelist, He gave them the power to become children of God; to those who believe in His name, who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God John 1:12-13.
Thus, just as those born of the will of the flesh and the will of man inherit others' sins, although they do not yet have their own: so those born of God, if there is no fault of their own will in them, are not stained by the injury of others' iniquity.
Because just as the first birth implanted what the newborn did not do by eating, so the second birth, having washed away original sin, imputes sin only to the will.
Therefore, in this part, we must be separated from the evil ones, in which, having the firstfruits of the Spirit, buried with Christ in baptism, we have risen.
In this, too, we put off the old man, who is corrupted according to the desires of error, with the grace of God preceding and accompanying us, so that we may put on the new man, who is created according to God in righteousness and in the holiness of love: Through the Lord.
Refutation of the Sermon of Fastidiosus the Arian
by Fulgentius of Ruspe
Chapter One
When I read your letter, dearest son Victor, filled with the sweet fragrance of faith and love, I took great pleasure and joy in reviewing it. I found the subject you intended for me to refute, the discourse of Fastidiosus. Upon reviewing it, I was deeply saddened by his loss and even more compelled to detest his blasphemy.
We know that after embracing the Christian faith, the monastic profession, and the honor of the priesthood, which he took in the sight of men but did not maintain before the Lord, he turned away from the path of truth and completely forgot his redemption. He became a servant of fornication and lust and thus rejected the service of divine majesty. Hence, he turned from being a Catholic to a heretic, and from the evil treasure of his heart, he brings forth evil.
Against the true faith, against Catholic truth, he spews that discourse, intoxicated with the poison of impiety, when he rejects the bread of life and, by the indication of his name, disdainfully casts away the nourishing food of true faith. In that profane discourse, calling us Homousians, as the Arians usually call us, he said these words:
"The Homousians," he said, "asserting that the Trinity is inseparable and indivisible, neither considering the Son to be lesser than the Father nor the Father to be unbegotten, the creator of His Son."
Please consider, in these words of Fastidiosus, some things are so wrongly stated that they can never be rightly asserted; some things are so impiously said that they could be rightly stated and heard if only piety were present. That he thought he could accuse us of, for saying that the Trinity is inseparable and indivisible, he stated so wrongly and impiously that no one could ever state it rightly. For who does not see with what great impiety the Arians assert a separable Trinity?
The blessed Apostle says about us:
"Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?"
(Romans 8:35)
And a little later:
"I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord."
(Romans 8:38)
Chapter Two
So, when the blessed Apostle trusts that by God's grace we cannot be separated from His love, how can those who do not hesitate to preach a divided Holy Trinity not feel themselves entangled in the deadly snare of impiety, when they cannot show the works of the Trinity as separable in any way?
For in what the evangelist says about the Son: "All things were made through Him, and without Him nothing was made" John 1:3; and in what the blessed David sings: "How magnificent are Your works, Lord! You made everything in wisdom" Psalm 104:24; and the blessed Apostle professes Christ as the power and wisdom of God, about whom it is said: "For in Him all things were created in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers—all things were created through Him and for Him" Colossians 1:16; it is clear that all the works of the Father are the same works of the Son, and the same works of the Holy Spirit.
The Holy Trinity indeed works inseparably: there is no work done by the Father that is not done by the Son, or done by the Son that is not done by the Holy Spirit. For it is written, "By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and all their host by the breath of His mouth" Psalm 33:6.
Regarding the wisdom, which we say is created among the angels, we read in the book of Ecclesiasticus: "Wisdom was created before all things, and understanding of prudence from everlasting" Ecclesiasticus 1:4. To show that the angels were also made by the Word of God through whom all things were made, the Holy Scripture immediately added: "The fountain of wisdom is the Word of God, and her ways are everlasting commandments" Ecclesiasticus 1:5. And shortly after, to show that the angels belong to the works of the Holy Spirit, it is said: "One only is most high, the Creator Almighty, the powerful King, and greatly to be feared, who sits upon His throne and rules. God created her in the Holy Spirit" Ecclesiasticus 1:8.
What, therefore, can be denied to have been made by the Holy Spirit, from whom the power of the heavens is said to be established, and whose works are proclaimed as created wisdom? For when the blessed Apostle spoke of the divine gifts which God granted to His Church and said: "Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are varieties of service, but the same Lord; and there are varieties of activities, but it is the same God who empowers them all in everyone" First Corinthians 12:4; then, after listing the diversity of heavenly gifts, he added: "All these are empowered by one and the same Spirit, who apportions to each one individually as He wills" First Corinthians 12:11.
What, among all creatures where wisdom reaches from one end to the other mightily and orders all things sweetly (Wisdom 8:1), can be found apart from the work of the Holy Spirit, since Christ, who is the power and wisdom of God, declares that He casts out demons by the Spirit of God? For He Himself said: "But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you" Matthew 12:28.
How then does Fastidiosus deny the inseparable Trinity, when no Christian dares deny that the works of the Trinity are the same and inseparable in all creatures? For the one God, namely the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, works inseparably. The Only Begotten of God indeed declares that His works are the same as those of His Father, saying: "For whatever the Father does, the Son does likewise" John 5:19. And yet what the Son does, He does in the Holy Spirit, by whom He casts out demons.
Chapter Three
But let the Arians not claim any issue of divergence just because we said that the Son, too, does everything through the Holy Spirit. They might think that someone should be considered lesser if something is done through him by another. Let them listen to our Savior, who completely opposes this perversion by saying:
"But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God" (John 3:21).
Here, let the Arians choose how they want to understand God mentioned in the Son—whether as the Father, the Son, or the Holy Spirit. If they consider it to be the Father in whom good works are done by men, they themselves destroy their own argument when they blaspheme against the person of the Holy Spirit. For they would not dare to call the Father lesser, to whom they do not want to proclaim the Son as equal in divinity. Therefore, since a man does good works in the Father, and Christ casts out demons in the Holy Spirit, they should recognize the equality of the Father and the Holy Spirit.
If they say that it is the Son here because good works are done in the Son and in the Holy Spirit, they are compelled to admit not only that the Son and the Holy Spirit are equal but also that the works of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are the same and inseparable. For "the same Spirit works all these things" (First Corinthians 12:11), as the blessed Apostle testifies.
If the Arians consider it to be the Holy Spirit, they must be compelled from this passage to acknowledge that the Holy Spirit is God. For it does not say that the Spirit of the Lord, "who does what is true, so that his works may be clearly seen in the Holy Spirit," but "in God," which we do not say is done solely in the Father, nor solely in the Son, nor solely in the Holy Spirit, but in the Holy Trinity itself, which is one God. We confess that the truth is done by man, in whom the blessed David hints that strength is done by the faithful, saying: "We will gain strength in the Lord, and he will bring to nothing those who trouble us" (Psalm 60:12).
For he is the one God about whom the blessed Apostle says, "For from him and through him and to him are all things. To him be glory forever" (Romans 11:36).
Chapter Four
So then, how is the Holy Trinity said to be separable by the impious, when it works inseparably? From whom, as much as can be understood, it is not thought to be separable even in spirit, as the truth of the matter demands?
For nothing can be separated locally from our God, that is, from the Holy Trinity itself, because the same supreme, true, and good God, just as He made everything, so He contains and fills everything immeasurably.
He is not physical, nor local, and therefore even physical things cannot be separated locally from God; because every body is in a place, and no place exists without God.
For God is not contained by any place, but He Himself contains every place; in which there is no bulk, and whose power is immense.
Therefore, since bodies, which cannot exist without a place, cannot be separated locally from God, without a doubt, neither can the spirits that God created be separated locally from God.
For every spirit that God created, wherever it is, there is God: who, although He is not in wicked spirits through grace, by which He grants holy life and happiness to whom He wills, He is always in all His creatures through natural power, so that no creature or part of a creature can be found in which God is not present through power.
Therefore, the nature that can be separated from God is the one that could or can be subject to sin.
And there is no other thing that can depart from God except the substance that can or could sin by its own will.
For Isaiah says: "Behold, the hand of the Lord is not shortened, that it cannot save, nor is His ear heavy, that it cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated you from your God" (Isaiah 59:1-2).
In the Book of Wisdom, it is also shown that men are separated from God not by places, but by wicked thoughts and unjust actions.
For it is said there: "Perverse thoughts separate from God. Proven virtue corrects the foolish: for wisdom does not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins; for the Holy Spirit of discipline flees deceit, and removes itself from thoughts that are without understanding" (Wisdom 1:3-5).
Here, who does not see the Trinity of persons indicated by their properties?
For it is said that perverse thoughts separate from God, by which the person of God the Father is recognized.
Then it is added, that wisdom will not enter a malevolent soul, by which Christ is indicated, whom Paul calls the power and wisdom of God.
Then it is said that the Holy Spirit flees deceit, and removes itself from thoughts that are without understanding.
Lest anyone think that any wicked or impious persons could be separated locally from this Holy Trinity, which is one, true, and good God, the Scripture speaks thus shortly after: "For the spirit of wisdom is humane, and will not free the blasphemer from his lips, because God is the witness of his innermost being, and a true inspector of his heart, and a listener to his tongue. For the Spirit of the Lord has filled the whole world" (Wisdom 1:6-7).
Thus, the divine words do not cease to proclaim the immensity of the Holy Trinity.
Blessed David certainly knew this very well, and therefore said: "Where can I go from Your Spirit, and where can I flee from Your presence? If I ascend to heaven, You are there; if I make my bed in hell, behold, You are there" (Psalm 139:7-8).
Concerning Wisdom, that is, the Son of God, Scripture says, "She reaches from one end to the other mightily and sweetly orders all things" (Wisdom 8:1).
Therefore, since nothing is locally separated from the Holy Trinity, which is entirely everywhere, but only iniquities and perverse thoughts, as we have already said, separate from God; whoever tries to assert that the Trinity is separable must necessarily say that either the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit can naturally be subject to perverse thoughts and iniquities.
But who could entangle themselves in such a snare of impiety to suspect any separation in that Trinity, where there is natural unity, when Paul the faithful confidently trusts that through received grace, as we have shown above, he cannot be separated from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
But the blessed apostle John also confirms that love is from God, and that love is God with these words:
Beloved, let us love one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves is from God.
And, God is love.
Of course, it cannot be separated from itself, because it is inseparable.
For when people, who can be separated from each other, not only possess it inseparably, but also make one heart and one soul out of many hearts and souls; what madness is it to say that love itself is separable, which usually unites separated minds with inseparable love?
Hence it is that Paul said: For even if I am absent in body, I am with you in spirit, rejoicing and seeing your order.
And it is written in the Acts of the Apostles that the multitude of believers were of one heart and one soul.
Which, of course, only the spirit of faith and love knows.
For the love of God has been poured into our hearts.
And through this Spirit, it is made that all believers, as the Apostle says, are one body and one spirit.
Hence he himself says in another place: For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free, and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
The only-begotten Son of God commanded with his own mouth that all nations be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Chapter Five
When baptism is given in the name of the Trinity, it unites all the faithful into one body. As the blessed Apostle says, "We are one body in Christ, and individually members of one another"
Romans 12:5.
The multitude of believers also had one heart and one soul through love, which is poured into our hearts by the Holy Spirit who has been given to us.
It clearly shows how great the impiety is to say that the Trinity itself is separable, when indeed any creature is separated from God not by place, not by time, but only by sins.
Hence God says about some people: "This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me"
Matthew 15:8.
And yet He says: "I am a God who is near, and a God from afar. Can a man hide himself in secret places so that I do not see him? Do I not fill heaven and earth?"
Jeremiah 23:23-24.
David himself says: "Behold, those who are far from you will perish"
Psalm 73:27.
And to show what it means to be far from God, he added, "You destroy all who are unfaithful to you."
Therefore, one departs from God with the heart, and one approaches Him with the heart.
For it is clear that God is entirely everywhere, but is contained by no place.
For God is a spirit, creator indeed, not created, the unchangeable maker of all bodies and all spirits, eternal, immense, just, and good.
He never departs from any of the things He made by the immensity of His nature.
For it cannot happen that God is absent in power to anything that has its being from God.
And yet, through mercy and judgment, by which the Church never ceases to sing to Him
Psalm 100:1, it is not inappropriate to say that He is present to the faithful and far from the unfaithful.
For as it pertains to nature, because everything that is created, whether corporeal or spiritual, was made by the Holy Trinity alone, that is, one God, who is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, with one will, one operation, one power, one benevolence, and one omnipotence.
Just as the Father fills all creation with power, not with bulk; so the Son fills all, so the Holy Spirit fills all.
For the Trinity does not fill all creation in such a way that the Father fills part, the Son part, and the Holy Spirit part, nor is all filled by the Father alone, nor by the Son alone, nor by the Holy Spirit alone.
For who would dare to think of the Trinity, that is, of one God, in this way, not to say foolishly, but indeed sacrilegiously; since the power and divinity of God must be naturally immense just as it is naturally eternal?
But men given to carnal senses cannot think of God except carnally.
And they think that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit can be separated from each other as men are separated from each other; who, as they are distinguished by the manner and quantity of each one's body, must thus be separated by places.
But while such men roll their souls in the mud of the flesh, creating phantasms for themselves, and weighed down by the burden of vanity, the more they are occupied with thoughts of those things which present a bodily mass to their bodily eyes, the less they can ascend to understand divinity.
Nor do they heed the command from the Lord God through the holy
Isaiah, not to think of Him in the same way we think of the creatures, which we know were made by Him; because He does not think as we men think.
Hence
Isaiah says: "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways my ways, says the Lord: for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts"
Isaiah 55:8.
Chapter Six
God the Father, His Word, and the Holy Spirit—that is, the Holy Trinity—is the only, true, and good God. In Him, there is no thought that changes with time. Unlike humans, He did not think one way before creating the world and another way after creating the world, nor will He think differently after the figure of this world passes away, for the plan of the Lord remains forever.
Just as He is unchangeable, He is also inseparable. The Trinity is one God, neither a body nor a created spirit, because a body is confined by place, and every created spirit is limited by its nature. The Trinity, however, is one God, eternal, with no times co-eternal with Him; He is immense, and no creature can contain Him. Because He is immense, He is wholly present everywhere; He cannot be confined by place nor stretched or contracted by space.
God is wisdom, God is truth, God is love. This is the Father, this is the Son, this is the Holy Spirit, this is the Trinity itself, who is the one, true, and good God. Therefore, if anyone can teach that there is any division in wisdom, truth, or love, let them boldly declare the Trinity to be divided. But if wisdom, truth, and love are in no way divided, then the Trinity is known to be indivisible and inseparable.
It is clear then that the impiety of Fastidiosus was great, since he thought we were to be utterly blamed for confessing the inseparable and indivisible Trinity. As the preceding discussion has shown (which has been strengthened not only by reason but also by a sufficient abundance of divine testimonies), the immense nature of the Trinity cannot be contained by place, nor can any person in the Trinity be subject to sin, because the Trinity itself is naturally eternal, perfect, and unchangeable in justice.
The heretical error indeed tries to assert falsely that the Son is lesser, but with piety preserved, Catholic truth confesses Him as equal. Heretics, thinking of the incorporeal divinity only in corporeal terms, say the Son is lesser by nature. Under the pretense of the Christian name, which they falsely display, they involve themselves in the abominable crime of idolatry. For what is it to say that one person of the deity is greater and another lesser, if not to place idols of different kinds and virtues not on walls, but in hearts, which is worse?
Thus, Arians clearly show they worship two gods when they deny the Son is equal to the Father. They claim the Son is lesser, not by the assumption of flesh (which the truth of faith holds), but by the nature of immense divinity. This is despite it being said of Him, who is the wisdom of God, who is the radiance of eternal light (Wisdom of Solomon 7:26). It is said in the Letter to the Hebrews: "He is the radiance of His glory, and the exact representation of His being" (Hebrews 1:3). Let them consider the radiance of eternal light and recognize that just as that light is eternal and immense, so too its radiance is neither naturally posterior nor lesser in any way; but eternity and immensity are equal.
Chapter Seven
The Christian faith, therefore, which knows the Only Begotten God and that He was born solely from the nature of the Father and created from the Virgin Mary, recognizing that both natures truly remain in Him, thus truly confesses Him to be equal to God the Father, so that without the crime of lying and impiety, it also proclaims Him to be lesser.
For because He has one natural divinity with the Father and one natural humanity with the mother, the Son is equal to the Father in that He is truly God from the Father. The Father is greater than the Son in that the Only Begotten God is truly human.
This, therefore, is the true faith, this is the holy piety, this is the Christian belief: to believe in one and the same Son of God, both the nature of the Father’s divinity, and not to deny the substance of the mother’s humanity; not to believe in a different divinity of the Son from the divinity of God the Father, nor to separate the humanity of the Son from the humanity of the Virgin mother, but to believe in the same true God the true and entire humanity of our kind, in the same true and entire human being, to believe in the full and complete divinity of the Father’s nature.
For he who denies the unity of the Father’s substance in the Son is polluted by Arian impiety; but he who denies the truth of the flesh in the Only Begotten God is profaned by the crime of Manichaean heresy; and he who denies in the same Son of God the human, that is, rational soul, is immediately defiled by the sacrilege of the Apollinarians.
Chapter Eight
Therefore, the truth of both the paternal and maternal nature believed in the Only Begotten God to fullness, and the dual substance in the one person of Christ preserved with natural properties, the Son is rightly and truly said to be equal to the Father and lesser, rightly and truly proclaimed to be coeternal and subsequent, rightly and truly declared always born, and born in time, and always unchanging and changed in time.
Thus, the Son is equal to the Father, because He always has this from the Father. He is also lesser than the Father, because He temporally received this from the Virgin. Therefore, just as the Son is rightly said to be equal to the Father when humanity, through which He is lesser than the Father, is not recognized in Him: so the same Son is wrongly said to be lesser when the unity and equality of divinity with the Father is denied in Him. We say, therefore, the Son is naturally equal, and we say He is lesser. We say He is equal according to the form of God, born; according to the form of a servant, humbled. We say He is equal to the Father, in whom we know He was born without beginning from the Father; we also say He is lesser, because when the fullness of time came, God sent His Son made from a mother, made under the law.
Galatians 4:4.
Therefore, just as we undoubtedly proclaim Him born, so we also proclaim Him made. For we say He was born without beginning from the heart of the Father, we say He was made in time by the work of the Trinity. For His own Son, from His own nature, the Father begot, and from the nature of the virgin, He made. However, whatever He made, He made with the cooperation of the Son and the Holy Spirit. Therefore, the Father alone indeed begot His own Son, but He did not make Him alone. For in the Only Begotten Son, the eternal generation of the Father alone, and in the same Son made, is the one operation of the whole Trinity. Indeed, the Only Begotten God, Creator of man, was made man, and the same one who made woman from man was made man from woman.
Hence it appears that the testimonies which he brought forth impiously from the Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles, and Solomon, do not take away the unity of the paternal nature from the Son, but show the sacrament of the divine incarnation. Knowing this most certainly, John the Baptist said: This is He of whom I said: After me comes one who is ahead of me.
John 1:15.
Proclaiming the truth of this sacrament, the apostle Peter said: Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ.
Acts 2:36.
Indeed, he rightly said made, whom he proclaims crucified. For the Only Begotten God, incomprehensible and immortal, made by no one, and the eternal maker of all things, deigned to become Christ by His own work, so that He could be crucified by the work of the Jews: because the cross could not bear the Redeemer of the world handed over, unless the womb of the virgin had given birth to the Maker of the world. Therefore, also through Solomon, hinting at the truth of His generation and creation, He said: The Lord created me at the beginning of His ways in His work.
Proverbs 8:22.
But before He said this, He clearly foretold the sign of His future incarnation, saying: If I declare to you the things that happen daily, I will recall the things that are from the beginning.
Proverbs 8:21, according to the Septuagint.
Enumerating further, He added: The Lord created me at the beginning of His ways in His work. This creation is certainly from the beginning, not before the beginning. For afterward, He says, He founded me before the ages; and a little later: He begot me before all the hills. Here, when He says before the ages, and before all the hills, He wanted us to understand the eternity of His divine birth. Both before the ages, and after the age is eternity. And thus the eternity of the Son of God before the age has no beginning, just as His eternity after the age has no end. Thus, putting past time for the future time, Wisdom says, The Lord created me, instead of He will create me; and thus He said it as if it were already done which was certainly to be done: just as through blessed David He said: They have pierced my hands and my feet; I can count all my bones. They gaze and stare at me. They divide my garments among them and cast lots for my clothing.
Psalm 22:16-18.
Therefore, saying The Lord created me, He shows how He was made. Also saying, They have pierced my hands and my feet, He shows how He was made.
He will be crucified.
Just as it was certain to happen, as the Son of God sang about His passion through David, it was also certain to happen, as He, who is the wisdom of God, prophesied about His incarnation through Solomon.
For Solomon himself said a little earlier: "Wisdom has built her house, and set up seven pillars" (Proverbs 9:1), which pertains to the birth of the Lord's incarnation.
Isaiah also speaks about Christ's passion in such a way that he declares what will happen as if it has already happened.
For he says about Christ: "He was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so He did not open His mouth" (Isaiah 53:7).
For the very birth of the Only Begotten of God from the Virgin, according to the flesh, is sometimes predicted as future and at other times spoken of as if it were past.
For instance, in one place he says: "Behold, a virgin will conceive and bear a son" (Isaiah 7:14).
In another place, indicating it as already done and past, he says: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given" (Isaiah 9:6).
Who then cannot see that all that was said concerning the humanity and passion of the Only Begotten of God by the prophets was truly destined to happen at that time, just as now it is truly past?
To show the unchangeability of the divine plan, it happened that prophetic Scripture spoke of what was expected in the future as if it had already occurred in speech.
For God, about whom the prophet says here, "Who made the future" (Isaiah 45:11, according to the Septuagint), wanted to narrate what had to be done as if it was already done because He established what happens in time with the unchangeable eternity of His disposition.
Therefore, even in those things where the work has not yet been completed, the arrangement of the Creator remains firm in eternity.
Thus, the Son of God, though He was to be created with His work, said He was created, just as He did not hesitate to say He was crucified, even though He was to be crucified.
Chapter Nine
However, with a perverse heart and sacrilegious mouth, he arrogantly wanted to assert that the Son is separate from the Father and the Holy Spirit because it is known that only He entered the chamber of the virgin's womb.
About this, it is said in the Book of Psalms:
"And he is like a groom coming out of his chamber" (Psalms 19:6).
Desiring then to affirm his perverse opinion, he did not hesitate to assert this blasphemy, saying that the Trinity could not in any way be separated, which is completely undivided.
Therefore, did the whole Trinity take on flesh?
Did the whole Trinity suffer the injuries of passion?
Did the whole Trinity lie in the tomb?
Did the whole Trinity descend into hell?
Did the whole Trinity rise from the dead on the third day?
Did the whole Trinity ascend into heaven on the fortieth day?
Does the whole Trinity sit at the right hand, or did the whole Trinity send the Spirit to the apostles on the day of Pentecost?
Or to which God could the whole Trinity say on the cross,  "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"
Or to which Father did the whole Trinity say,  "Father, into your hands I commend my spirit?"
If they can, let them declare.
But if they cannot say this, they destroy themselves with their own darts,  who argue that the Trinity is inseparable.
Chapter Ten
Finally, everything he presented against the Donatists, he stole from certain two letters. While we were in exile in Sardinia, it was written to the devout daughter of the Church, Stephania, against the Pelagians and Donatists, with the exact same wording that the same wicked man fraudulently placed under his own name.
So that you would not lack awareness of this matter, I have attached to this work the two letters that the mentioned Stephania sent to us, and our responses to her. So you may recognize that in that speech only those parts were truly Fastidiosus's, where in blind fury he attempted to attack the Catholic truth to the injury of the Holy Trinity.
Chapter Eleven
Now, with the Lord's help, I will respond to his blasphemies.
The entire Trinity did not take on flesh, nor did the entire Trinity feel the injuries of suffering.
Nor did the entire Trinity lie in the tomb.
Nor did the entire Trinity descend into hell.
Nor did the entire Trinity rise from the dead on the third day.
Any other things that are proven to pertain to the sacrament of incarnation are attributed to the person of the Son alone.
Those accusations he made, full of falsehood and perversity, can only be truthfully directed at the Sabellians, that is, the Patripassians.
They indeed fail when they are confronted and convicted of preaching that the Holy Trinity has one nature and one person.
Their perversity consequently leads them to this absurdity.
They do not at all believe in the divine birth.
Instead, they assign to the Father the nature according to the flesh, the suffering and death, the resurrection from the dead, the ascension into heaven, and all those things in the sacrament of incarnation that pertain to the person of the Son alone.
However, the Catholic Church, divinely inspired, holding the truth of faith, knows how to assert one nature of the Holy Trinity and at the same time very carefully attributes to each person their own.
Therefore, the Son of God, mercifully redeeming us, is rightly believed to have taken on flesh alone.
He did not take on human nature in such a way that one nature of divinity and flesh was formed in Him.
For in Christ, divinity could not be what flesh is, because each nature retained its own properties.
It was not possible for either of them to cease to exist or to be completely transformed into the other.
If this were to happen, it would rightly be said that the entire Trinity took on flesh when the Son converted His flesh into that divinity, which we profess remains common to Him with the Father and the Holy Spirit.
Chapter Twelve
Now indeed, because we say there are two natures in Christ: one divine and one human, we believe and confess that the human nature, that is, flesh and a rational soul, was assumed not by the whole Trinity, but by the Son alone.
In the unity of person, not in the unity of nature, the Only Begotten God took on flesh and soul. The person of the Son is not the same as that of the Father or the Holy Spirit.
Therefore, the unity of person, with the property of each substance remaining intact, just as it did not make the person in Christ double, did not make the assumption of human nature common to the Holy Trinity.
For the Son of God, just as there is one common nature with the Father and the Holy Spirit, so there is one common person.
Chapter Thirteen
It is therefore unique to the Son alone to have mercifully taken on the form of a servant. For that acceptance of the servant's form pertained to the person of the Word of God, which did not transition into the divine nature by confusion. Thus, the acceptance of that servant's form, according to which the Son of God, who is the Lord of all things and in whom all the fullness of divinity dwells, became truly and fully human, took nothing away from His divine fullness, nor did it remove any dominion.
Because in that one person, the divine and human nature remained without confusion. Hence, in the one and same Christ, both the truth of the human nature shone forth, and the unchanging eternity of the divine nature remained. For what He naturally possessed in eternity was neither diminished nor changed by what He took on in time.
For He became a servant in appearance, but did not cease to be naturally the Lord of all things. And He became poor according to the flesh: yet nevertheless remained exceedingly rich according to His divinity. Hence, the blessed Apostle asserts that Christians are enriched by poverty, saying: "You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though He was rich, yet for your sakes He became poor, so that you through His poverty might become rich"  Second Corinthians 8:9.
He would not make us rich by His poverty if, being made poor, He did not possess the riches of His natural divinity. Therefore, He became poor according to the form of a servant, but remained rich according to the form of God. The poverty of the servant's form is not common to Him with the Father and the Holy Spirit; because after taking on the poverty of human nature in the unity of the person, the divine substance remained rich in Him.
And what was the poverty of the rich Son of God but our weakness and our mortality? Whatever the Only-begotten God endured in weakness and death according to the flesh, His divinity did not feel. For God sent His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh  Romans 8:3, in which there was true flesh, but there was no pollution of sin.
Therefore, the likeness of sinful flesh was in the flesh of Christ, although it was not flesh of sin, for it was weak, passible, and mortal, subjected to wounds and pain. Yet all these things were common to Christ's divinity and humanity personally, not substantially. The person of Christ is completely distinct from the person of the Father and the Holy Spirit. This one person of divinity and humanity in Christ remains in such a way that it neither allows one nature to be separated from the other nor permits both to be confused.
Therefore, Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the true life, is the way for us because He had true weakness in the truth of the flesh; and He is the true life for us because true virtue remained in His true divinity. Discerning this, the Apostle says, "For though He was crucified in weakness, yet He lives by the power of God"  Second Corinthians 13:4.
Chapter Fourteen
In one and the same Christ, just as the weakness of human flesh could not give or restore life by itself, because the power to lay down life and take it up again did not come from human weakness, but from divine strength;
so the eternity of divine power, which naturally has the property of living unchangeably and unfailingly, could not feel any weakness or death on the cross.
Therefore, the only begotten Son of God is recognized as true God born from the Father and true man made from the mother, because He showed signs of weakness in the truth of the flesh, and demonstrated signs of power in the truth of divinity;
showing clearly in the unity of His person that He naturally shares one aspect with us and another with the Father and the Holy Spirit.
For Christ naturally shares with us a connection of soul and flesh; but with the Father and the Holy Spirit, He naturally shares the connection of divinity.
How then could the Son of God have in common with the Father and the Holy Spirit those things which belong to the flesh, since He did not confuse His flesh with His divinity in any way?
Thus, it does not contradict the Catholic faith that we believe our nature was assumed in the unity of the person by the only begotten Savior, while we acknowledge that the substance of the Holy Trinity remains one.
Indeed, the whole Trinity made that humanity of the Son, but just as the whole Trinity made it, the whole Trinity did not assume it, because the person, which is not common to the Son with the Father and the Holy Spirit, is itself the one in Christ that is of divinity and flesh.
However, where there is any distinction, whether of persons or substances, it is not always referred to the communion of acceptance whatever is found in the communion of work.
Because this seems obscure when expressed only in words, it is better to provide an example to facilitate understanding as much as the matter allows.
Chapter Fifteen
There is indeed a resemblance to knowledge readily available to the faithful, which God placed in His likeness. This image, however, is the human mind. For it is written that the Lord said:  "Let us make man in our image and likeness"  (Genesis 1:26).
In this statement, the Arian heretics are much to be mourned, as they read the holy Scriptures but do not understand; and, confused by the blindness of their heart, they do not recognize the natural unity in the holy Trinity, in which they distinguish the persons of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit by preaching.  For in that testimony, which we have quoted above, the very Trinity, which is one God, true and good, shows the unity of its divinity, and clearly demonstrates the indication of three persons.
For He said,  "Let us make man in our image and likeness,"  lest the unity of substance be denied among the three persons; nor did He say,  "I will make man in my image and likeness,"  lest it be believed that there is only one person in that divine nature. But He wisely mixed the singular number with the plural, and when we read that God said,  "Let us make man in our image and likeness,"  we define what we say singularly to be of nature, and plurally to be of persons.
Therefore, this image, that is, the inner man, is naturally found to have three certain qualities: memory, understanding, and will. Memory is the power of the soul by which we remember. Understanding is the power by which we ponder with thought what we have conceived with memory. Will is the power by which we either desire something or avoid it: that is, by which we are found either to love something or to hate it.
These three, although they do not have distinct persons in man, are nevertheless distinct from each other by discernment; and thus in these three there is one person and one substance of the human mind, so that in the rational soul's nature, in which it is evident there is the image of God, we find a different memory, a different understanding, and similarly a different will.
For although we cannot think, love, or hate anything that we do not have in memory, because what oblivion has taken from the heart cannot be found there by thought or will; nevertheless, to recognize the distinction of memory, thought, and will, we often remember what we do not ponder with thought, nor desire with will; likewise, we think of some things that we do not love.
Our thought, therefore, which is born and formed in memory, is rightly called an inner word. For what is thought, if not an internal speech? Therefore, it is written:  "Say in your hearts, and be pierced in your beds"  (Psalm 4:5).
For in the Gospel, when the Lord Jesus said to the paralytic whom He healed,  "Your sins are forgiven"  (Luke 5:20), the evangelist Luke added, saying:  "And the scribes and Pharisees began to think, saying: Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?"  But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, He replied to them, saying,  "Why do you think evil in your hearts?"  (Luke 5:21, 22).
And what Luke said,  "They began to think, saying,"  Matthew said,  "And behold, some of the scribes said within themselves: He blasphemes. And when Jesus perceived their thoughts, He said: Why do you think evil in your hearts?"  (Matthew 9:3, 4).
In the book of Wisdom, it is also said of some:  "They said within themselves, thinking not rightly"  (Wisdom 2:1). It is therefore evident that to think is to speak within oneself. Thus, it is thought invisibly. Without the noise of a corporeal voice, each one says what he thinks, which he nevertheless conveys to another's hearing only by corporeal speech.
Chapter Sixteen
Therefore, that word which is born from memory, according to the nature by which it is found in memory to be born, cannot be conveyed to the ears of any person without a physical voice.
Hence, in order to be expressed to others, it is clothed in the form of a physical voice. A physical voice from the mouth is joined to this word.
And so it happens that the word, which was entirely in the mind spiritually, comes to others through a physical voice, and it does not depart from the mind from which and in which it spiritually remains.
For it is necessary that it remains entirely in the mind, even when it is entirely expressed in the voice.
Yet we cannot say that the expression of the word is not made by memory or will alone. For everyone who speaks remembers and thinks about what they are going to say; and they speak because memory and thought work together with the will to produce speech.
For anything a person knowingly says, they surely say willingly, so much so that if a person is compelled to speak against their will, they will not speak as long as their will is not inclined to do so.
This is why those who, now under fear or pain of temporal matters, tribulations, or tortures, have abandoned the truth of the Catholic faith and turned to impiety and disbelief, will find no excuse to say they denied the true faith unwillingly, as it appears they did so by their own will.
For even if the mind is led to deny faith by tribulation or torture, it did not deny unwillingly. To deny the faith, one first thinks and wills it, and thus expresses that denial: because thought along with will decided that it should be done.
Chapter Seventeen
So, to return to what I was discussing, in the very image of God, that is, in the very mind of man, thought, which is born and shaped from memory, and is rightly called the word, takes on only a physical voice so that it can be heard by physical ears.
Thus, in that holy and divine Trinity, only the Word of the Father, which is the Mirror without blemish and the Image of God’s goodness  (Wisdom 7:26), namely, the brightness and the figure of His substance  (Hebrews 1:3), when He was in the form of God, did not consider equality with God something to be grasped; but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant  (Philippians 2:6).
Therefore, only the Son took on flesh so that He could be seen by physical eyes and touched by hands; only He took on human nature in such a way that He made it His own, and through it, mercifully infused the knowledge of His divinity. Yet, in revealing Himself, He certainly revealed the Father in Himself. By granting the knowledge of His divinity, He also granted the knowledge of the Father.
For the divinity that is one with the Father and the Son makes it so that the Son cannot be known without the Father, and the Father cannot be known without the Son. Hence, He said: "Have I been with you for so long a time, and you have not known Me? Philip, whoever has seen Me has seen the Father"  (John 14:9).
Thus, the Son, who alone took on flesh, naturally showed the Father in Himself by the unity of divinity; just as a speaker, while speaking the truth that he remembers, indicates what is brought forth from himself, showing what is stored within his mind.
But that physical voice with which the spiritual word is clothed, so that it is brought to the knowledge of the listeners, comes simultaneously from memory, thought, and will; but it is received only by thought, that is, the inner word, so that the inner thought proceeds to the physical ears of those present.
However, that word, just as it is received in the form of a physical voice and goes out entirely to the listeners, is found entirely in the heart along with memory and will spiritually.
Therefore, whoever sees this image in the mind of man will quickly ridicule the empty talk of heretics, who, thinking carnally about spiritual matters, refuse to believe that in that holy Trinity anything was done by the three that was only taken up by one person by divine disposition: although that human nature was indeed made by the work of the whole Trinity, it was taken up into the unity of the person by the Son alone.
For just as it is certain that "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God"  (John 1:1); so it is certain that "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us"  (John 1:14).
But what did we receive? The Word of the Lord and God with whom the Word was, not the Father and the Son.
Chapter Eighteen
Thus, the name of the Word shows the distinct person of the Father and the Son: but because He was God, it teaches the one substance of the Father and the Son.
Therefore, the flesh that belongs to the Word alone is not of the Father nor of the Holy Spirit, because the Word of God does not share one personhood with the Father and the Holy Spirit. According to the common operation of divinity, in which there is a trinity of persons, as the Son received it, so did the Father and the Holy Spirit.
For it was fitting that the Son, who is naturally born from the Father alone according to divinity, should be born naturally from the Virgin according to the flesh. But in that Trinity, just as there are not two Fathers nor two Holy Spirits, so there will not be two Sons. For that Trinity has one Father, one Son, and one Holy Spirit.
But one Father and one Holy Spirit according to divine nature; and one Son, according to both divine and human substance. Therefore, the Trinity is distinct in persons, although in nature the one divinity of the Trinity is not divided or separated.
Hence, humanity is found assumed in the person of the Son alone. Because of the nature, the operation of the holy Trinity is always one; but because of the persons, the assumption of humanity belongs to the Son alone.
However, while we discuss these matters for the instruction of the faithful, we must also consider the heretics, who are undoubtedly carnal and animalistic, and therefore incapable of spiritual matters, about whom the Apostle says: "But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God. For they are foolishness to him, and he cannot understand them because they are spiritually discerned" First Corinthians 2:14.
The apostolic authority indeed testifies that heretics are especially carnal or animalistic. For blessed Paul places heresies among the works of the flesh. Likewise, the blessed Apostle Jude calls those who separate themselves from the Church "animalistic," saying: "These are the ones who cause divisions, worldly-minded, devoid of the Spirit" Jude 19.
This is indeed what we showed that blessed Paul said: "But the natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God." Therefore, it is not surprising that those who do not have the Spirit of God cannot understand divine things. For it is written in the Book of Wisdom: "Who can know your counsel, unless you give wisdom and send your Holy Spirit from above?" Wisdom 9:17.
Hence, the holy Apostle also asserts that the things of God are revealed only by the Holy Spirit, saying: "For to us God revealed them through the Spirit" First Corinthians 2:10. And a little later he says: "Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, that we might know the things that have been freely given to us by God" First Corinthians 2:12.
However, it is good that we too, as much as we are divinely helped, strive to become all things to all people, so that we might win all, imitating the blessed Apostle First Corinthians 9:20.
Chapter Nineteen
Since the Arians do not understand what we have said—that in the one divine nature, something is made by the entire Trinity, which is not taken on by the entire Trinity; nor is it believed possible that the entire Trinity made that flesh, which, however, one person of the Trinity took on—let us, as the Apostle says in First Thessalonians 2:7, be like little children among them, and offer them this example to nurture their spiritual understanding without tiring or disturbing their narrow hearts.
We know that the divine Trinity is one, inseparable, and indivisible, whose nature cannot be divided into three persons, nor can the three persons be confused into the unity of an indivisible nature. For even the human mind, in which we said the image of God resides, has received a certain indication of the holy Trinity within itself, without having a distinction of three persons within it. This is something the divine Trinity has uniquely preserved for itself.
Therefore, although there is memory, intelligence, and will in the human mind, these three are not three persons: because in each human being, in whose mind, or whose mind is the image of the divine, not only the mind but also the soul and body are naturally found to be one person. Therefore, in creation, as much as the magnitude of the matter we are discussing allows, we perhaps find such an example in nature that we cannot find in persons. We said that the humanity of the Son of God was made by the entire Trinity, which, however, was accepted not by the entire Trinity but by the Son alone into His person. For that flesh was made by the entire Trinity, that is, by the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; but only the Word became flesh.
Since, as we said above, regarding creation, we cannot find three persons in one mind, that is, in one body, we do not struggle to find at least two natures in one person. For the person of each living human being consists of a rational soul and a body: from which, however, many things are done in such a way that although they are done by both soul and body together, sometimes they pertain only to the soul or only to the body.
For who does not know that only the body is refreshed and nourished by physical food, in whose consumption the operation of both flesh and soul is common? For the soul acts through the body, or rather with the body, when the body eats; yet only the body receives what the soul together with the body acts to receive. In that consumption, therefore, there is a joint operation of the soul and flesh, but the reception is solely of the flesh. Only the flesh is nourished by physical food to the extent that only it becomes fat if it receives it. However, the nourishment and fattening of the soul consist not in physical bread but in spiritual bread. For man does not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God (Matthew 4:4).
In the perception of this word, however, so that the soul is nourished by its food, the flesh is joined in the work. This happens when the soul brings the bodily ears to the words to hear them, or the bodily eyes to the scriptures to read them. So, in this, too, there is a joint operation of the flesh and soul, where the reception is solely of the soul. Let the Arians see these things in creatures and not doubt that the divine nature of the holy Trinity is one, and that it was possible, indeed it happened, that that flesh was made by the one and inseparable work of the entire Trinity; but in the sacrament of the incarnation, it pertained only to the person of the Only Begotten God.
Chapter Twenty
Therefore, the entire Trinity did not take on flesh, nor did the entire Trinity feel the injuries of the Passion, nor did the entire Trinity rise from the dead on the third day, nor did the entire Trinity ascend into heaven on the fortieth day.
But, as I showed above, only the Son took on flesh, in whom the unconfused property of both natures remains. This is why He is the same one who, according to true divinity, remained completely impassible. For that divinity naturally suffers nothing, just as it is naturally unchangeable. The nature that is changeable is subject to suffering. Therefore, no suffering could happen to that nature to which natural change could not belong.
Only the Son lay in the tomb, but that nature of the Only Begotten God could be buried, which could die. According to the nature of the flesh, the Only Begotten God lay buried in stone, according to which He was nailed to the cross with nails. How could His divinity be confined in the tomb, which neither the earth can confine, nor heaven?
Therefore, the unity of the person made that passion and that burial to be one in Christ, of divinity and flesh. But the property of each substance in Christ made only the flesh of Christ naturally subject to suffering and death, with the divinity remaining impassible and immortal.
Christ, therefore, who is not the Trinity, but one person of the Trinity, truly hung on the cross according to the truth of the flesh, and truly lay dead in the tomb, with the Apostle saying that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that He was buried, and that He rose from the dead on the third day according to the Scriptures.
All of these things, according to the unity of the person, the whole Christ endured, but according to the natural property, they pertain only to the truth of the flesh. Thus, according to the soul alone, He descended into hell. For at the same time that is found between the death of Christ and His resurrection, the same Christ, according to the truth of the flesh, truly lay in the tomb, and according to the truth of the rational soul, truly descended into hell.
And thus, according to the truth of human nature, from the time Christ, hanging on the cross, bowed His head and gave up His spirit, until He rose from the dead after receiving His spirit back, He was not in the same place according to the flesh and the soul. According to the flesh, He truly lay dead in the tomb; according to the rational soul, He descended into hell; but according to the divinity, by which He is one God with the Father and the Holy Spirit, He filled the entire creation.
Therefore, according to the flesh, He was in the tomb alone, but according to the soul, He was in hell alone. According to the divinity, which is confined by no place but is found ineffably everywhere, He did not abandon His flesh in the tomb, nor did He forsake His soul in hell, just as He can never be absent from the earth or heaven.
The same Son of God, who lay in the tomb according to the flesh and descended into hell according to the soul alone, because He had said about His soul: I have the power to lay it down, and I have the power to take it up again.  The Lord Jesus, after He had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven and sat at the right hand of God
All these things, which were done temporally in the Only Begotten God, partly according to the soul alone, partly according to the flesh alone, and partly according to the soul and flesh together, are rightly referred to the one person of divinity and humanity in the Son of God, but they cannot be referred to His divine substance in any way.
Therefore, none of these things can be attributed to the person of the Father or the Holy Spirit, because the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are not one person. Nor can anyone attribute the passion or assumption of flesh to the Father or the Holy Spirit, because it is blasphemous to proclaim the divine nature changeable or passible in any way, according to which Christ is always born without beginning.
He was incomprehensible when he allowed himself to be understood.
He was impassible when he felt the injuries of suffering.
He was immortal when he succumbed to death.
He was indivisible when, according to the flesh, he lay in the tomb, and according to the soul, descended to the lower parts of the earth.
He was immense when he ascended to the heights of heaven from the humility of this earth.
Chapter Twenty-One
If that wretched Fastidiosus had not rejected this faith, without a doubt he would not have perished.
But because he denied it both in deeds and in words, it is not surprising that he became wicked in action, corrupt in speech, and an enemy of light, walking in darkness.
Physical fornication, which first took hold of his mind and body, then led him to the precipice of spiritual fornication. For he took the members of Christ and made them members of a prostitute. And thus, he did not hesitate to lose the chastity of faith, because he did not regret losing the chastity of his body.
See how much evil the lust of the flesh brought him, which could lead that wretch to deny the truth! This was the storm that carried away the chaff from the Lord's threshing floor and fixed it among the thorns of heretical impiety. This made him speak against his own conscience and utter perverse words in contempt of the Trinity.
For he did not believe what he said to be true, but with a double heart, he preferred to say something other than what he believed.
Possessed by such despair, he took away his own hope of forgiveness and sought to fulfill the pleasures of lust without restraint. From his own mouth, which should have been used for justification, he received an increase in condemnation. When his tongue, which should have spoken words of repentance, spoke words of blasphemy.
Thus, that wretched Fastidiosus preferred to go to the place where he could blaspheme against God with sacrilegious insolence. In his fornications, having no fear of God, he did not even fear man.
Woe to that wretch, who wanted to be separated from the fellowship of the church so that he would never lack punishment; and who wanted to sin without any fear so that he might deserve to burn forever.
Chapter Twenty-Two
Where are those two years now that Fastidiosus thought were happy because he spent them in fornication as he wished? How quickly they passed! Even if they had been not just two hundred but two thousand years, they would have passed quickly.
What will the wretched man do when he comes to the judgment of the one he denied? What will he receive for such actions and words? What will he receive, that man who was indulgent with his body, blind in heart, and blasphemous in error? He who first violated the temple of God within himself by fornication, then left the church physically as well. What will he receive from that Holy Trinity, he who preferred to be a servant of lust and treachery? Surely nothing but the eternal fire, which is prepared for such deeds.
And in this time, Fastidiosus's fornication ended quickly, but his eternal burning in that fire will not end. Therefore, Christians should avoid both forms of fornication that miserable Fastidiosus fell into; keeping their souls, they should maintain purity of both heart and body. They should hold onto the faith within the Catholic Church. They should believe and confess the inseparable and indivisible Trinity, which in its divine nature has nothing created, nothing even partially begun; whose single and inseparable work made everything in the heavens and on earth, visible and invisible.
They should also believe and confess the Only Begotten God, who was born of the Father according to true divinity, and created from the Virgin according to true humanity; and through the work of the Trinity, took on flesh and a rational soul in the unity of the person for the salvation of the world. Holding firmly to this, they should act and persevere in good works. For in Christ Jesus, the only thing that counts is faith working through love.  And anyone who departs from it will be guilty of his own soul. But anyone who perseveres in it to the end will be saved.
Galatians five, verse six: "For in Christ Jesus, the only thing that counts is faith working through love."
Matthew ten, verse twenty-two: "But anyone who perseveres in it to the end will be saved."