Against Greed Book Fourby Salvianus of Marseilles

My dear Church, nurturer of blessed hope, I understand that what we've discussed in previous writings may upset some of your children who don't love Christ enough.
But we don't give much weight to their opinions because it's not surprising that they dislike words about God, as they might not like God Himself.
We shouldn't expect those who don't love salvation and their own souls to love the message that brings them salvation.
So, just as in other matters, the opinions and judgments of the saints are enough for us in this case too.
With them feeling the same as we do, we're confident that God feels the same way with us.
Since the Spirit of God dwells in His saints, it's clear that God is present where the Spirit does not depart.
Therefore, the opinions of wicked people, like pagans or worldly people, should be considered of little value or completely worthless.
As the Apostle says, "If I were still trying to please people, I would not be a servant of Christ" (Galatians 1:10).
What's more troubling and difficult is that some of your children, under the guise of religion, dissent from it and show more worldly behavior in their appearance than in their minds.
Their opinion, if I'm not mistaken, suggests that every Christian should consider familial ties at the end of life more than Christ.
Because this opinion is completely profane and detestable, they try, I think, to cover their unfaithful preaching with a kind of shadowy addition, saying that all who believe in God should only serve Christ while they are healthy and well.
But when they are departing from this world, they should remember their fleshly relatives more than their divine duty.
As if Christian people should be different when they are healthy and when they are leaving this world.
Everyone should present themselves to Christ in health and in death, in their earlier life, and in their later life.

If that is so, then one person would have Christ as a young man, and another as an old man; and people would need to change their faith as often as they change with age.
If a person is to be different in their worship of God when they are strong or weak, healthy or sick, then as the state of the human body varies, so would God Himself be changeable to them; and as often as a person's health changes, so too would their religion. As if those who are healthy in Christ should not also be Christ's in death.
And what about this: "The one who perseveres to the end will be saved" (Matthew 10:22 and Matthew 24:13)? Or that saying in the sacred Proverbs of divine wisdom: "Wisdom is praised at the end" (Proverbs 1:20, according to the Septuagint)?
This shows that although wisdom is beneficial at every age, it is especially important that everyone is wise at the end of their life because the wisdom of earlier years will not be praised unless it concludes well. For wisdom is praised at the end.
It is enough, says the harmful preaching, it is enough for a person if they have done good in the past, even if they do nothing at the end. I add much more, or at least not less; if possible, one must do even more as death approaches. First, because there is never too much good work. Then, because as one approaches God's judgment, they should strive more to please the judge, as if they were already in judgment. Finally, if they have done some good before the end, they should do much more at the end, so that the end of their life does not seem worse than their previous actions.
If, however, they have done little good work, they should certainly do much more at the end; so that what they failed to do earlier in life, they at least make up for at the end; and if they are guilty of neglecting it before, they may at least be somewhat excused before their Lord by compensating for past inhumanity with final devotion.
But let us return to the main point. Divine wisdom says that wisdom is praised at the end.

Why didn't he praise her in childhood, in youth, during times of safety, or in times of prosperity? Clearly, because in all these situations, whatever is praised is uncertain. As long as someone is subject to change, they cannot be praised with security; and that is why, as he says, wisdom is praised at the end. When someone leaves the uncertainties of dangers, they deserve certain praise for having escaped all the varied situations. At that point, the praise is stable and firm, because the merit of the praised one can no longer perish.
"Wisdom," he says, "is praised at the end."
What is the wisdom of a Christian, I ask? What but the fear and love of Christ? For the beginning of wisdom, he says, is the fear of the Lord Psalm 111:10; Proverbs 1:7 and 9:10; Sirach 1:16. And elsewhere: Perfect love, he says, casts out fear First John 4:18. Therefore, as we see, the beginning of wisdom is in the fear of Christ, and its perfection is in love. Thus, if the wisdom of a Christian is the fear and love of the Lord, we are truly wise only if we always love God above all things; and this at all times, but especially at the end, because wisdom is praised at the end.
Therefore, if wisdom is praised especially at the end through this, if God is loved above all things, what madness is it, then, for someone to say that Christ should be preferred to carnal relations by the healthy, but not by the dying? For why should the healthy prefer Him, if the dying should not? Or if someone can religiously put their kin and relatives above Christ in death, why didn't they religiously do so before? Or if there is any moment in life when someone should love others more than themselves and God, why don't they do so in their earlier life?
And so, everything becomes loose, vanishes, and perishes, and no one holds anyone cheaper than themselves, nor anyone inferior to God. For if there is any time when God can justly be placed after relatives or kin, there is none when He can justly be placed before them.

But if it is true, there is never a time when it shouldn't be preferred, never a time when it can justly be postponed. None, indeed. And therefore, not even in the extreme: because even a righteous man, says the prophet, on the day he errs, will perish Ezekiel 3:20. Therefore, if every error of the erring is punished with destruction, and human life is endangered by those errors that commonly pollute human innocence; what do we think will happen when there is a detestable infidelity against God Himself?
For if, says the Apostle, every disobedience receives a just reward Hebrews 2:2, how will we escape if we neglect such great salvation? No one neglects true salvation more than he who puts anything before God. Since our salvation is the gift and mercy of God, what means of attaining salvation does he have who despises God Himself, in whose mercy our salvation consists? Or since God is the judge of the living and the dead, what hope can there be in God's judgment for him who, even in dying, despises the judgment of Him by whom he is immediately to be judged?
And therefore, as the divine Scripture says, in the judgment by which he judges, he will be judged Matthew 7:2: that is, by the judgment with which he judges God, he himself will be judged by God. Nor could he think it unjust if in the future the Lord places him after all others, who in the present places God after all others; nor can he complain if God considers him more damnable than all, since he himself considers God more worthless than all.
But someone might say he does not do these things with the intent to despise God or to think Him worthless, but rather to love those whom he has made heirs, or to honor them. Let us agree that this is so: this excuse is almost always available to even the most flagrant and criminal offenders. For even fornicators can say they do not fornicate with the intent of despising God, but because they are overcome by bodily heat and weakness.

Murderers might claim they do not shed human blood out of contempt for God or hatred, but only out of greed. However, this excuse is meaningless for the wicked. The reason behind sin does not matter since all sin is an offense against the Divine.
Let's agree, as I mentioned earlier, that no one commits their actions more against others than against God out of contempt. They are either motivated by the honor of their heir or compelled by love. But what do we do when this very fact shows even more neglect and contempt for God?
If you indicate that you honor and love those to whom you leave your possessions, surely you do not indicate that you honor or love God, to whom you leave nothing.
So, whatever you say in your defense actually works against you. The love and honor you show to others reflect your contempt and insult toward God.
When you leave things to others because you honor them, you are not honoring God to whom you leave nothing. When you leave many things to others because you love them, you clearly do not leave anything to God because you do not love Him.
Imagine a man and God stand before you as you die and testify. It’s clear and without doubt: whom you choose, you prefer. If honor is with one, it must be found as contempt with the other.
If the man who is preferred rejoices because he is loved by you, it is necessary that God, who is bypassed, grieves that He is not loved. You might think that God does not need man's generosity, and therefore you say, what need is there for man to give anything to Him who gave everything to all?
Whether the Lord needs our generosity or not, or how He might need it, we will see. Meanwhile, because you do not dare deny that He provides everything to everyone, He is undoubtedly more worthy of our generosity since He first gave to us. The more we are unequal to His benefits, the more just it is that we try to repay Him with our services.

Because both human nature and common custom bind us all with a general law: we owe more gratitude to those from whom we've received generosity. The gift we receive indeed compels us to repay it. Before experiencing someone's generosity, we're free, not burdened by the debt of favors. However, once we become debtors, our conscience compels us to reciprocate.
Therefore, we owe even more to God, from whom we receive everything; and we can repay His benefits even less because, even if we want to return what we owe, we're giving back what's already His. Thus, no one should take pride in their generosity. Just as everything we receive from the Lord isn't ours, everything we return isn't ours either. So, indeed, punishment is due to the unfaithful who deny God what was loaned to them by Him; but someone who returns what was received cannot count it as generosity.
But you might say, "God doesn't need repayment." He needs it less than anything else. He doesn't need it according to His power, but according to His command; not according to His majesty, but according to His law; and in Himself, He doesn't need it, but in many, He needs it. He doesn't seek generosity for Himself, but for His followers. Therefore, He doesn't need it according to omnipotence, but according to mercy; not as God for Himself, but out of compassion for us.
For what does God say to the pious and generous stewards? "Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was hungry, and you gave me food; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink." And lest this argument seem insufficient, He added the opposite, saying to the greedy and unfaithful: "Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was hungry, and you gave me no food; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink; I was naked, and you did not clothe me"

Where, then, are those who say that the Lord Jesus Christ does not need our services? Look, He recalls being hungry, thirsty, and cold. Let any of them answer if He does not need when He complains of hunger, if He does not need when He testifies of thirst. I will add even more, that Christ not only needs as others do but needs much more than others. For among all the poor, there is not one universal poverty. There are some who, even if they lack clothing, do not lack food; many lack shelter but not clothes; many lack a home but not substance; there are also those who, even though they lack many things, do not lack everything. Only Christ alone is the one who lacks nothing that is not lacking in all of humanity. None of His followers are exiled, none are tormented by cold and nakedness, without Him also feeling cold. He alone is hungry with the hungry, He alone is thirsty with the thirsty. And therefore, as far as His compassion is concerned, He needs more than others. For every poor person only needs for themselves and in themselves: only Christ alone begs in the universality of all the poor.
And since these things are so, what do you say, oh man, who claims to be a Christian? When you see Christ in need, do you leave your wealth to those who do not need it? Christ is poor, and you accumulate the riches of the wealthy? Christ is hungry, and you prepare delicacies for the affluent? Christ also complains of lacking water, and you fill the cellars of drunkards with wine? Christ is consumed by a lack of all things, and you heap up abundance for the luxurious? Christ promises you eternal rewards for the gifts you give, and you lavish everything on those who give you nothing in return? Christ offers you immortal goods for good deeds and eternal evils for bad ones; and you are neither moved by heavenly goods nor by everlasting evils? And you say you believe in your Lord, whose reward you do not desire, nor do you tremble at His anger?

So, as we mentioned in the previous book, you don't believe.
Even though you appear to be part of the respected group of converts, even though you dress religiously, even though you claim to have faith, and even though you falsely show holiness with your attire, you don't believe at all. You don't believe.
I've said this about both men and women of this kind: they don't believe.
Anyone can adopt the habit of a saint's name and write the title of sacred religion; if they prioritize others over themselves with their wealth, they definitely don't believe.
No one who truly believes would prefer to benefit others with their resources rather than themselves.
No one would be content to buy happiness for others at the cost of their own misery.
No one would choose to suffer eternal poverty to provide temporary pleasures for others.
Therefore, anyone who prioritizes others over themselves with their inheritance doesn't truly believe that what they give to God will benefit them.
Let any of them explain why they leave their wealth to others.
Isn't it because they believe it will benefit the one they leave it to? Certainly.
So, whoever you are, if you leave things to others because you are sure it will benefit them, then if you believed that religious gifts would benefit you, you would definitely keep them for yourself.
Because the more you love yourself than those to whom you leave things, the more you would keep for yourself if you believed even slightly that it would benefit you.
You don't hate yourself, so you wouldn't want to avoid benefiting yourself.
But you don't believe that what you leave for the poor will benefit you.
And that's why you prioritize others over yourself, because you don't believe the religious work will benefit you at all.
As you believe, so you will receive.
You think little of the Savior, and the Savior thinks little of you.
You put Christ after others, and Christ puts you after everyone.
To you, the Lord is worthless compared to even the most lost people, and you will be counted among the lowest of the lost.
But perhaps you flatter yourself, as I said before, with some view of religious profession.

You are deeper in debt because you make grand promises with your vow of holiness. Therefore, you will face more punishment because you fulfill fewer of those promises.
The divine word says, "A servant who does not know his master's will and does not do it will receive few blows; but the one who knows and does not do it will receive many blows" (Luke 12: 47, 48). You, under the guise of profession, make grand promises but deliver nothing in reality. You are guilty of forgery, lying to God about everything.
It's not surprising that the sacred word testifies that judgment must begin with the temple of God. For it says, "Judgment must begin with the house of the Lord" (First Peter 4:17). Elsewhere it also says, "Begin at my sanctuary" (Ezekiel 9:6).
But let's go back to the previous point. God says to the greedy and unbelieving, "Go into the eternal fire which my Father has prepared for the devil and his angels." Do you think that some good physical deeds will save you from this evil?
You boast that you have loved chastity. But remember, even those whom the Savior condemned to eternal punishment in the Gospel were not marked by impurity. You recall that sobriety pleased you? Yet those of whom Scripture speaks are not punished for drunkenness.
You say you have fasted? Yet those people were not made guilty by feasts. But evidently, you have a great reason for pleasing yourself with your abstinence and fasting, for you fasted and lived sparingly not to feed the poor with your wealth after your death, but to increase the riches of your heir.
You indeed reap great fruits of abstinence. You ate less bread so another could have more gold. Your stomach shrank from frugality so that perhaps the treasure of some immoral person could grow.
So when you come to God's judgment, will you rightly attribute your fasting to Him, saying: "I fasted, Lord, and abstained, and for a long time, I refrained from all delights. And the result proves it. For now, my heirs are affluent because of me, abounding in vast riches."

To take something from the Gospel reading, this is what the Savior said about the most lost rich man, and you can say the same about your heirs:
"They are clothed in purple and fine linen, and they feast splendidly every day.
They lie on the talents I buried, and they press down on the heaps of silver and gold I collected.
I also prepared for them the material of all pleasures; they are filled with the delights I left behind.
So I refrained for a long time so that they could now indulge.
My frugality is their excess.
The floors of their overflowing dining rooms are swimming in wine; they make mud with noble Falernian wine.
Their tables and carved decorations are constantly drenched, always moist.
They luxuriate on the tapestries I made, and they fornicate on the silks I left behind.
And when you have said all these things for yourself, how can you not deserve eternal reward from Christ, for whom you have prepared such abundance of delights?"
Oh, how much better, whoever you are, how much better and healthier it would have been for you to be poor and needy than rich!
For poverty could have presented you to God; wealth has made you guilty.
Therefore, it would have been more right for you to be saved through need than to have burdened both yourself and others with your wealth:
yourself, by leaving it poorly to others; and others, by possessing what you left with the most inhumane use, and then poorly leaving it to others after them.
If you want to be well-advised, if you want to have eternal life and wish to see good days, leave your wealth to the needy saints, to the crippled, to the blind, and to the sick.
Let your resources be the food of the poor, let your wealth be the life of the needy; so that their refreshments are your rewards, and their nourishment refreshes you.
For if they eat from what is yours, you will be satisfied; if they drink from what is yours, you will quench your thirst and heat; their clothing will clothe you, and their warmth will delight you.
Therefore, do not think it vile and contemptible to leave your wealth to the wretched and needy: you will make Christ their heir.
And what shall I say about the name of Christ?

Christ will be your heir, and through Him, you will reap the benefits of the inheritance. Whatever you leave to Christ, you will possess everything through Him. But I think you see these things as trivial and dismiss them as mere dreams and nonsense.
You don't believe that Christ spoke the truth. Your actions show that you don't believe in Him at all. You neither follow His commands nor regard them as important, or you outright condemn them as false. Because of this, all the saints should mourn and weep, for you and others like you believe in no one less than Christ.
If an innkeeper promised you something, you wouldn't deny them trust; if a merchant or fishmonger asked for a loan, you wouldn't doubt they would repay what you gave. Sometimes, things are trusted to liars and perjurers, provided they give a guarantee and a surety.
Christ gave you both the most faithful guarantee and the best sureties: the guarantee in the Gospel, His apostles as sureties, and if that's not enough, His patriarchs, prophets, martyrs, and indeed the entire series of divine scriptures. And yet, you don't believe Him or give Him your trust?
I ask, who among men could you find so reckless and miserable that you would deny them trust with so many sureties? Therefore, you give your possessions to the rich and deny them to the needy; you give to the extravagant and deny the saints; you give to perhaps any scoundrel and deny Christ. As you judged, so you will be judged; as you chose, so will you receive.
You will not have a part with Christ whom you despised; you will be with those whom you preferred over Him. But perhaps someone from the number of unbelievers will say that the cause is not worthy enough to move God or to bring men into eternal peril.
I know that everyone always thinks their own guilt is forgivable. Thieves consider theft a minor fault, drunkenness seems harmless to the drunk, and fornication is not a crime to the shameless. There is no crime so great that it is not excused by the judgment of the one committing it.

But if anyone wants to know how seriously great crimes are judged by God, let them learn from the saints. Aware of the future judgment based on God's words and their Lord's teachings, the saints punish even minor sins in themselves. Therefore, they are always engaged in God's work, always in repentance, always on the cross.
Blessed are those who, while having compassion for everyone, never totally forgive themselves, sparing themselves in nothing, but fully dedicating themselves to God. Hence, they are worthy of reward in the future judgment because they continually consider themselves guilty here.
What can I say about their mercy and generosity, which is almost the initiator of all virtues among them? Many of them have these as the beginnings and almost the cradles of their conversion. Before entering the threshold of holy profession, they leave nothing of their own possessions behind, following our Lord's saying: "Sell all your possessions, and give to the poor, and come follow me" (Matthew 19:21).
Those intending to follow God's call first sell everything before they follow. Considering wealth a burden and obstacle, they do not think they are ready to follow God until they cast off all earthly impediments. It's like people moving homes: they first transfer their belongings to the new place before moving themselves. They transfer everything they own, so they can move to a house full and overflowing with immortal goods, confident that nothing will be lacking for them, having left nothing behind in the soon-to-collapse house that would perish.
This, therefore, is the hope and trust of the saints. They provide for themselves by abundantly transferring their possessions, so they may enjoy the eternal abundance of immortal goods.

But you, whoever you are, male or female, who have forgotten your soul and salvation, how do you expect to find what you have not set aside and prepared for the future, when you rob yourself of your resources here, giving them to those who do not need them or who already have abundance?
How do you believe that God will return to you what you do not trust Him with? Finally, how do you want to receive what you do not believe? No one expects to be repaid what they have not lent; nor is anyone so foolish as to think they will get back what they have not invested. And so, you cannot hope that God will return to you what you did not trust Him with, as you did not believe in Him.
Therefore, the divine saying must be fulfilled in you: "Because you have left your wealth to others or strangers, your tomb will be your home forever" (Psalm forty-eight, eleven through twelve).
And also what the Savior says to someone like you: "Because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will begin to vomit you out of my mouth" (Revelation three, sixteen through seventeen). You say: "I am rich, and I have wealth, and I need nothing"; and you do not know that you are wretched, poor, blind, and naked.
Therefore, no one who values human over God in life, in death, in action, in gift, or in will, should flatter themselves about the prerogative of life and profession. This security is penal and pernicious: presumptive hopes are burdens of guilt; assumed absolution brings condemnation. Whoever excuses themselves, accuses God, according to this: "For if anyone thinks they are something when they are nothing, they deceive themselves" (Galatians six, three).
Therefore, no one should easily consider their own cause. No one escapes more difficulty than the one who presumes they will escape. These things may seem harsh and severe. Why not? For all discipline, as the divine word says, is not of joy, but of grief (Hebrews twelve, eleven).
These things are harsh and severe. But what are we to do? It is not permitted to change the nature of things; and truth cannot be expressed otherwise than as the force of truth itself demands. Some think these things are harsh, I know, and I am quite certain. But what are we to do? Without hardship, one does not reach the kingdom.

Narrow and tight is the way that leads to life, says the Lord.
And the Apostle says, I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing with the glory that is to be revealed to us (Romans 8:18).
He means that all human effort is unworthy in comparison to the future glory.
Therefore, nothing should seem hard or severe to Christians, because whatever they offer to Christ for eternal happiness is trivial compared to the great reward they will receive.
Nothing great on earth is given by man to God, whereas what is in heaven is the greatest.
It is hard for the greedy to give away their possessions. What a surprise?
Everything is hard when commanded to the unwilling.
As many types of commands as there are, so many are the adversaries.
If the Lord commands generosity, the greedy get angry; if He requires frugality, the wasteful curse.
The wicked consider holy words as their enemies, thieves dread anything written about justice, the proud dread anything commanded about humility, the drunkards oppose where sobriety is commanded, and the impure detest where chastity is ordered.
Therefore, either nothing should be said, or whatever is said will displease some of these people.
Any wicked person would rather curse the law than correct their mind; they prefer to hate the commands rather than their vices.
In this situation, what should those do who are assigned by Christ to speak?
They displease God if they are silent; they displease people if they speak.
But, as the apostles responded to the Jews: We must obey God rather than men (Acts 5:29).
I give advice to all who find the law of God heavy and burdensome, if they are willing to accept it, on how the commands of God can please them.
For all who hate the holy command, the cause of their hatred lies within themselves.
The aversion is not in the commands of the law, but in their own morals.
The law is good, but their morals are bad.
Therefore, let people change their intentions and their affections.
If they make their morals acceptable, nothing that the good law commands will displease them.

When someone starts to embrace goodness, they naturally grow to love God's law because it resides within them, just as it does in the actions of righteous individuals.
May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.

