There is indeed a resemblance to knowledge readily available to the faithful, which God placed in His likeness. This image, however, is the human mind. For it is written that the Lord said: 
 "Let us make man in our image and likeness" 
 (Genesis 1:26).

In this statement, the Arian heretics are much to be mourned, as they read the holy Scriptures but do not understand; and, confused by the blindness of their heart, they do not recognize the natural unity in the holy Trinity, in which they distinguish the persons of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit by preaching. 
 For in that testimony, which we have quoted above, the very Trinity, which is one God, true and good, shows the unity of its divinity, and clearly demonstrates the indication of three persons.

For He said, 
 "Let us make man in our image and likeness," 
 lest the unity of substance be denied among the three persons; nor did He say, 
 "I will make man in my image and likeness," 
 lest it be believed that there is only one person in that divine nature. But He wisely mixed the singular number with the plural, and when we read that God said, 
 "Let us make man in our image and likeness," 
 we define what we say singularly to be of nature, and plurally to be of persons.

Therefore, this image, that is, the inner man, is naturally found to have three certain qualities: memory, understanding, and will. Memory is the power of the soul by which we remember. Understanding is the power by which we ponder with thought what we have conceived with memory. Will is the power by which we either desire something or avoid it: that is, by which we are found either to love something or to hate it.

These three, although they do not have distinct persons in man, are nevertheless distinct from each other by discernment; and thus in these three there is one person and one substance of the human mind, so that in the rational soul's nature, in which it is evident there is the image of God, we find a different memory, a different understanding, and similarly a different will.

For although we cannot think, love, or hate anything that we do not have in memory, because what oblivion has taken from the heart cannot be found there by thought or will; nevertheless, to recognize the distinction of memory, thought, and will, we often remember what we do not ponder with thought, nor desire with will; likewise, we think of some things that we do not love.

Our thought, therefore, which is born and formed in memory, is rightly called an inner word. For what is thought, if not an internal speech? Therefore, it is written: 
 "Say in your hearts, and be pierced in your beds" 
 (Psalm 4:5).

For in the Gospel, when the Lord Jesus said to the paralytic whom He healed, 
 "Your sins are forgiven" 
 (Luke 5:20), the evangelist Luke added, saying: 
 "And the scribes and Pharisees began to think, saying: Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?" 
 But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, He replied to them, saying, 
 "Why do you think evil in your hearts?" 
 (Luke 5:21, 22).

And what Luke said, 
 "They began to think, saying," 
 Matthew said, 
 "And behold, some of the scribes said within themselves: He blasphemes. And when Jesus perceived their thoughts, He said: Why do you think evil in your hearts?" 
 (Matthew 9:3, 4).

In the book of Wisdom, it is also said of some: 
 "They said within themselves, thinking not rightly" 
 (Wisdom 2:1). It is therefore evident that to think is to speak within oneself. Thus, it is thought invisibly. Without the noise of a corporeal voice, each one says what he thinks, which he nevertheless conveys to another's hearing only by corporeal speech.