ON THE FOUR WILLS IN CHRIST BOOKLET
  
  
    You ask about the will of God and the will of man in the same way. Christ was God, and therefore the divine will was in Him. And because He was also man, similarly the human will was in Him. I do not mean the human will that fault and vice create, but the one that human nature requires.
    
    Therefore, in Christ, the divine will was as far as Christ was God; and similarly, the human will was in Him as far as He was human. The human will, however, is considered in three ways: according to reason, according to piety, according to the flesh.
    
    Therefore, in Christ, there was the will of divinity and the will of reason, and the will of piety and the will of the flesh. The will of divinity dictated through justice; the will of reason approved through obedience and truth; the will of piety sighed through compassion in another's suffering; the will of the flesh murmured through suffering in its own pain.
    
    See if these are not all in Christ. That leper who asked for healing and acknowledged majesty, confessed the power of the divine will, saying: Lord, if you will, you can make me clean (Luke 5). And the Lord, to show both the judgment and power of that same divine will, said: I will, and due to the power, added be clean (ibid.). This is an example of the divine will in Christ.
    
    For the will of reason, which was subject to the divine will through obedience, He said: The spirit indeed is willing (Matthew 26). For the will of the flesh, which resisted the suffering due to its weakness, He said: But the flesh is weak (ibid.). The spirit was willing through the will of reason, following the disposition of the divine will in the suffering of His flesh. But the flesh was weak, by the natural providence by which it had learned to hate its own suffering, resisting the suffering.
    
    Therefore, according to the will of divinity preceding in disposition, and according to the will of reason approving and following the divine disposition, Christ willed to suffer. But according to the will of the flesh, according to which naturally as far as He was human, because He did not hate His own flesh, He did not will to suffer. Yet in this, He was not contrary to the divine will; because even what He did not will was itself the will of the divine will.
  
  
    There was another will in Christ, the will of piety or humanity. For that very piety is called humanity, and those are called humane who are pious, and easily compassionate towards others' miseries. For it is characteristic of humanity to suffer with and be moved by piety in another's misery. A beast can suffer, but to suffer with is proper to humanity. Therefore, the will of piety is called the will of humanity, because it is of man to be moved by piety. And this is similarly found according to human nature in Christ.
    
    When He approached Jerusalem seeing the city, He wept over it (Luke 19). Why did He weep if He did not grieve? Therefore, He did not will what He grieved. What did He grieve? The loss. If He grieved over the loss of those people, He did not will their loss. How did He not will? Certainly according to the divine will, which would be just, He willed. According to the will of reason, He consented to justice and approved of justice. But according to the will of piety, without hating justice, He grieved over their misery, just as according to the will of the flesh...
  


    
        He did not accuse justice, but refused punishment. Each will acted according to its own nature and followed what was relevant to it. The divine will pursued justice, the rational will obedience, the human will mercy, and the will of the flesh followed nature. None of these were contrary to each other, but each sought what was its own, so that even though they aimed at different things, they were not opposed to each other.
    
    
        This means that although one could will something different, it did not mean rejecting another's will. For just as it was natural for divinity not to abandon justice, so it was just for the flesh to maintain its nature; and for piety, it was just not to love another's misery. In this way, in Christ, there was a will of divinity dictating justice; a will of reason approving justice; a will of humanity through which no harm was wished upon anyone; and a will of the flesh which did not wish for its own suffering.
    
    
        It was just for the flesh not to wish for its own suffering, because this was according to nature, and it was just for God to wish for the suffering of the flesh, because this was according to justice. The flesh did not therefore refuse because God wished it, just as God did not wish it because the flesh refused. Similarly, piety mercifully did not wish for the suffering or loss of the wretched according to the feeling of compassion, and this was not contrary to God justly wishing it; but it loved mercy which was its own, and yet it did not disapprove of justice which was not its own.
    
    
        It should be understood that the mortal flesh is burned with the fear of suffering, and piety is moved with compassion out of love only in this present life, in which compassion is owed to the wicked as long as they can be corrected, and suffering is not removed from the good as long as they can improve. But when this mortal body puts on immortality, and this corruptible body puts on incorruption (1 Corinthians 15), then neither will the flesh be afflicted by suffering or the fear of it, nor will the mind receive any pain from compassion for another's suffering. There, the flesh will have security against suffering, and the soul will have purity in piety. The security of the flesh will come from being impassible, and the purity of the mind from truth. 
    
    
        Understand what I am saying. To suffer and to sympathize are both forms of suffering. Suffering is given to man because of iniquity; sympathy, however, is commanded because of goodness. It is just and fair before God that he who suffers should also sympathize, so that iniquity is erased through suffering and goodness is exercised through sympathy. This pertains to the goodness of mortal life, that it should accommodate itself to its own condition in others, and become a participant in another's suffering through sympathy, so that just as suffering is a necessity, sympathy is an act of goodness. Where there is no suffering, there will be no sympathy. 
    
    
        This is not because there will be cruelty in another's suffering, but because there will be no torment from another's misery. Here, to sympathize is a virtue; there, not to sympathize is felicity. Here, you sympathize willingly, are moved by piety, and feel pain out of goodness. There, you do not sympathize because of felicity, are not moved by eternity, and do not feel pain because of impassibility. Thus, sympathy cannot exist except where suffering can exist, because sympathy itself is a form of suffering.
    
    
        Certainly, those who do not remove suffering there do not lay aside sympathy; for just as they suffer corruptibly for their own iniquity, they also sympathize carnally for another's unhappiness according to the affections of mortal life. Hence, the rich man, placed in torment, was anxious about his brothers, so that the misery would be added to his own suffering, that he would be tortured in his own punishment by another’s misery.
    
    
        But Abraham, even though he saw the torment, persisted in the certainty of felicity without the pain of compassion (Luke 16), and repelled him justly, saying:  "Son, you received good things in your life, and Lazarus likewise bad things" (ibid.). 
    


  Just as in the joy of eternity, the hearts of the righteous, clinging unchangeably to divine justice through the love of truth, will not desire or approve anything other than what they know to be according to that justice, it is said: 
   
  I will enter into the strength of the Lord; Lord, I will remember only your righteousness. 
   
   
  (Psalms 70) 
  . 
  However, in this life, where we cannot perfectly know or foresee the judgment of the same divine justice, we can even will some things that are not just according to it without injustice; because it only pertains to us that where we do not know what pleases God more, we choose what best agrees with piety. 
  But where the judgment of divine justice is immutably shown, there is no longer any place for piety against it. For if anything moves us there out of compassion, it is either due to a dominant vice of affection, or to the weakness of a corruptible nature unable to resist passion. There are three types of compassion. One is from vice, one from nature, and one from virtue. Compassion from vice is when the affection is touched by reprehensible sorrow, where it was previously held by illicit love. Compassion from nature is when the soul, with its inherent affection of piety, sympathizes with others' sufferings whenever it sees nature oppressed or afflicted against the measure of piety or humanity. Compassion from virtue is when we sympathize with others' sufferings for God's sake, namely when we see either justice oppressed or innocence afflicted. Compassion from vice is blameworthy; compassion from nature is irreproachable; compassion from virtue is praiseworthy. The first is condemned, the third is praised. The second, however, neither has blame, because it is from nature; nor reward, because it is not from virtue. 
  Therefore, in this life, as long as the mortal flesh can be harmed by passion, the mutable soul can also be touched by compassion. But where both will truly be impassible, there will be neither passion in the flesh nor any compassion in the mind. Now, therefore, both rightly use their mutability, if the flesh does not abandon patience in passion, and the soul does not exceed the measure of justice in compassion. If you ask for the time of compassion, we ought to sympathize as long as we can suffer. If you ask for the place, compassion should be shown where the mercy of passion is not yet to be despaired of. 
  David, when his son was sick, shed tears; when he died, he washed his face 
   
  (2 Samuel 12) 
  , to show that the misery of compassion should be borne as long as the mercy of passion is not to be despaired of. There is, however, a certain affection of compassion that pursues even lost nature with pity, according to which, in the likeness of our kind, we are as angry about faults not being corrected as we are compassionate about nature not being extinguished. Now, mortal life subjected to mutability endures misery for a time; but later, transferred to incorruption, it will put it aside. Now, weak in both passion in the flesh and compassion in the mind, then it will be healed in both, to be confirmed through the immortality of the flesh against passion, and through the immutability of the mind against compassion. For just as the sickness of the flesh is to suffer, so the sickness of the mind is to sympathize. 
  Therefore, God became man, who came to remove both, endured both. He took on passion in the flesh; he took on compassion in the mind. He willed to be sick in both for us, so that he might heal us who are sick in both. He was weakened by passion in his suffering; he was weakened by compassion in others' misery. He endured passion to the point of dying for those who were to die, he accepted compassion to the point of weeping for those who were to perish. For the sake of misery, he gave his flesh to passion; for the sake of mercy, he troubled his soul to compassion. In his flesh, he suffered for us by enduring; in his mind, he sympathized with us by sharing our suffering.


  The weakness in him, according to the nature of the flesh, did not want its own suffering, just as the mercy of his mind did not want the suffering of others. For as he asked for the cup of suffering to be taken away from him according to the will of the flesh, which he knew would not be taken away, similarly, he prayed for the sentence of condemnation to be mitigated for others according to mercy, which he foresaw would unchangeably come to pass. Mercy did what was its own by showing compassion, and reason followed what was its own by obeying divine disposition. Hence, there was no contradiction.
  
  If Christ, as a man, according to the mercy he had assumed in his humanity, wanted something that, according to the divine will in which he arranged everything with the Father, he knew would not come to pass; because it pertained to true humanity to be moved by mercy, and to true divinity not to be moved from its disposition. Therefore, he did what he ought to according to both. He was not contrary to himself if he wanted according to the mercy appropriate to humanity what he did not want according to the justice due to divinity; because he willed both to want this and not want that. It is written: Jesus was deeply moved in spirit and troubled himself (John 11). Pay attention here: He troubled himself (ibid.).
  
  How did he trouble himself? What was this disturbance by which Jesus troubled himself? It was mercy itself, compassion itself that caused the disturbance. Was it not a good disturbance, well troubled for being moved by mercy? He troubled himself. Compassion disturbed him, and he troubled himself, having willingly accepted mercy. Just as he gave himself up when Judas betrayed him, so he troubled himself when compassion disturbed him. This is known and proven by frequent usage. It is said to a person when they suffer something: You troubled yourself; you brought this evil upon yourself. Thus, Jesus troubled himself when compassion, which he had willingly accepted, disturbed him; and he gave himself up when he granted the power to betray him to the one who betrayed him.
  
  Thus, Jesus, having assumed humanity, as long as he willed to bear it in a passible state, bore both suffering in the flesh and compassion in the mind according to the property of humanity. However, now translated into immutability, he can neither suffer corruption nor be disturbed by compassion. For we know Christ as both suffering and compassionate according to humanity (2 Corinthians 5). He said, My days vanish like smoke, and my bones burn like glowing embers (Psalm 102). The days vanished due to suffering; the bones burned due to compassion. The flesh died because of suffering, the soul dried up because of compassion. The pain of compassion was like a kind of frying of the soul, burning with mercy, pressed by compassion, dried by despair; I say despair not for himself, but for those who neither corrected themselves in evil nor were freed from evil. In all these things, we know Christ in the flesh when he bore true humanity and in true humanity bore true mortality (2 Corinthians 5). Now, however, we no longer know him according to the flesh, after having risen from the dead he no longer dies, death no longer has dominion over him. What he lives, he lives to God (Romans 6).