
by Taio of Zaragoza
Patrologia Latina Volume 


Book Four. Chapter One: The Four Qualities of Speech.

Everything that is said can be distinguished by four qualities: whether evil things are spoken evilly, or good things are spoken well, or evil things are spoken well, or good things are spoken badly. This teaching comes from Gregory's Moralia, book twenty-two, chapter one.
Evil is spoken evilly when something perverse is urged, as Scripture says in the book of Job, chapter two, verse nine: 'Bless God and die.'
Good is spoken well when right things are rightly proclaimed. As John says in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter three, verse two: 'Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.'
Evil is spoken well when vice is expressed by the speaker's mouth precisely in order to condemn it, as Paul says in his letter to the Romans, chapter one, verse twenty-six: 'Their women exchanged natural relations for those contrary to nature.'
In that passage he also added the detestable deeds of men, but he narrated dishonorable things honorably, so that by narrating dishonorable things he might call many back to the pattern of honor.
Good is spoken badly when something right is not put forward with right intention, as the Pharisees are reported to have said to the blind man who was healed, in the Gospel of John, chapter nine, verse twenty-eight: 'You are his disciple.'
For they certainly said this with the intention of cursing, not with the desire of prayer.
Or as Caiaphas said in the Gospel of John, chapter eleven, verse fifty: 'It is expedient that one man die for the people, so that the whole nation not perish.'
He spoke something good, but not well, because while he sought the cruelty of death, he prophesied the grace of redemption.

Chapter Two: Divine Judgments and Their Hidden Purposes.

Since divine judgments are very hidden - judgments by which in this life sometimes the good fare badly and the evil fare well - they are even more hidden when the good fare well here and the evil fare badly. This comes from Gregory's Moralia, book five, chapter one.
For when things go badly for the good and well for the evil, this is perhaps grasped: that the good, if they have sinned in any way, receive punishment here so that they may be more fully freed from eternal damnation; and the evil find here the rewards for whatever good they do in this life, so that they may be drawn to torments alone in the future.
Hence it is also said to the rich man burning in hell, in the Gospel of Luke, chapter sixteen, verse twenty-five: 'Remember, son, that you received good things in your lifetime, and Lazarus likewise received evil things.'
When things go well for the good in the present age, and badly for the evil, it becomes very uncertain whether the good receive good things so that, being provoked, they may grow toward something better; or whether by just and hidden judgment they receive here the reward for their works, so that they become empty of the rewards of the life to come.
And whether evils strike the wicked so that correction may defend them from eternal punishments; or whether their punishment begins here so that when it is to be completed it may lead them to the final torments of hell.
Because the human mind is pressed down by the grave fog of its own uncertainty among divine judgments, holy men, when they see the prosperity of this world coming to them, are disturbed by fearful suspicion.
For they fear lest they receive here the fruit of their labors; they fear that hidden divine justice sees a wound in them, and heaping external gifts upon them, repels them from inward gifts.
Hence it is said through the Psalmist in Psalm ten, verse five: 'His eyelids examine the children of men.' This is cited from Gregory's commentary on Ezekiel, book two, homily five.
For the eyelids of God are his very judgments, which close something to us and open something. By opening they examine us, to see if we are not lifted up by understanding. By closing they examine us, to see if we do not despise what we cannot understand.
With eyelids open we perceive; with them closed we see nothing. From Gregory's Moralia, book twenty-eight, chapter four.
What then, what do we receive through the eyelids of God except, as was said a little earlier, his judgments? These are closed to human beings in one respect, and opened in another respect.
With the veil of our ignorance cast over us, the incomprehensibility of divine judgment is in no way penetrated by the eye of the human mind, as it is written in Psalm thirty-five, verse seven: 'The judgments of God are like a great abyss.' This is from Gregory's Moralia, book twenty-nine, chapter thirty.
Let no one seek to scrutinize the divine judgments as to why, when one person is rejected, another is chosen; or why, when one is chosen, another is rejected. For as Paul attests, we have learned in his letter to the Romans, chapter eleven, verse thirty-three: 'His judgments are inscrutable, and his ways unsearchable.' From Gregory's Moralia, book nine, chapter fifteen.
The deeds of divine judgments are always to be revered without debate, because they can in no way be unjust.
Indeed, to seek the reason for his hidden counsel is nothing other than to be proud against his counsel.
When the cause of God's judgments is not grasped, it remains that we keep silent with humility beneath his deeds, because the sense of the flesh in no way suffices to penetrate the secrets of majesty.
Let the human mind return to itself, and let it not seek what it cannot grasp about divine judgments, lest if the cause of divine wrath is further examined, the wrath be provoked by the examination itself, and what humility could have placated, pride may inflame inextinguishably.
Through the apostle Paul it is said in his letter to the Romans, chapter nine, verse twenty: 'O man, who are you to answer back to God?' From Gregory's Moralia, book nine, chapter fourteen. Considering himself, man is silent and fears to discuss divine judgments, for he recognizes himself to be dust.
He who is called 'man' is proven unable to answer back to God. Because by the fact that he was taken from the ground, he is not worthy to examine the judgments above.
The same excellent preacher, considering the hidden divine judgments, says in his letter to the Romans, chapter eleven, verse thirty-five: 'O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are his judgments, and how unsearchable his ways!' From Gregory's Moralia, book twenty-eight, chapter four.
When he was examining the secret judgments of God concerning the rejection of the Jews and the calling of the Gentiles, and could not arrive at understanding them, he gave a very right response, for he knowingly inclined himself to God in that very ignorance.
However much anyone may advance in virtue, however much he may grow in knowledge, he does not suffice to penetrate the governance by which the Creator rules us with the measure of his judgments.

Chapter Three: Rising After the Fall Into Sin.

Those who have experienced the sins of the flesh should at least fear the sea after shipwreck, and should shudder at the known dangers of their own perdition, lest those who were mercifully saved after committing evils should die by wickedly repeating them. This teaching comes from Gregory's Pastoral Rule, part three, chapter twenty-eight.
To the soul that sins and never ceases from sin it is said in the book of the prophet Jeremiah, chapter three, verse three: 'You have the forehead of a prostitute; you refused to be ashamed.'
Therefore the fallen are to be admonished to strive so that, if they were unwilling to keep the received goods of nature intact, they may at least mend what has been torn.
What will those who have experienced the sins of the flesh say, if others remain standing in integrity while they themselves do not come to their senses even after losses?
What will they say, if while many bring others with them to the kingdom, these do not even lead themselves back to the Lord who is waiting?
It must be said to the fallen that they should consider past wrongs committed and avoid those impending. So that they may call past faults to memory and be ashamed to be polluted in the future.
Through the prophet Ezekiel it is said of the daughters of Judah in chapter twenty-three, verse three: 'They played the harlot in Egypt in their youth; there their breasts were pressed and their virgin bosoms handled.'
Indeed, breasts are pressed in Egypt when the will of the human mind is laid beneath the shameful desire of this world.
In Egypt the breasts of puberty are crushed when natural senses, still intact in themselves, are corrupted by the corruption of assailing concupiscence.
Those who have experienced the sins of the flesh are to be admonished to see with watchful care how much benevolence God expands in the embrace of his mercy toward us when we return to him after sins.
Through the prophet Jeremiah the Lord says in chapter three, verse one: 'If a man divorces his wife and she departs from him and marries another man, will he return to her again? Will not that woman be utterly defiled and contaminated? But you have played the harlot with many lovers; yet return to me, says the Lord.'
Behold, the argument of justice is set forth concerning the adulterous and abandoned woman; and yet to us returning after our fall, not justice but mercy is shown.
From this we should certainly gather that if such mercy is spared for us when we sin, how much wickedness is committed by us who do not return even after sin.
Or what pardon will there be from him for the wicked, who does not cease to call even after fault?
The prophet Isaiah says in chapter thirty, verse twenty: 'Your eyes shall see your teacher, and your ears shall hear a word behind you from one who warns.'
For each person receives the words of his warning as if placed before God, when he knows the precepts of his will before he commits sins.
For to still stand before his face is not yet to despise him by sinning. But when, having abandoned the good of innocence, one chooses and desires iniquity, one then turns one's back to his face.
Almighty God warns us as if following behind our back, because he persuades us to return to him even after fault.
He calls back the one who has turned away, he does not regard what has been committed, he expands the embrace of mercy to the one returning. Therefore we hear the voice of the one warning behind us, if after sins we return with a humble and contrite heart.
We ought therefore to be ashamed of the mercy of the one calling, if we do not want to fear his justice, because he is scorned with all the graver wickedness when, even though scorned, he does not disdain still to call.
Through the prophet Micah the Lord says in chapter four, verse ten: 'You will go as far as Babylon; there you will be delivered.' This is cited from Gregory's commentary on Ezekiel, book one, homily ten.
For Babylon is interpreted as 'confusion.' Often someone, after he has fallen into the confusion of vices, blushing at the evils he has committed, returns to repentance and raises himself from his falls by living well.
What then has this person done except come as far as Babylon and been freed there?
Sometimes someone, ashamed of the evils he has done, raises himself against himself, and by acting well returns to the state of righteousness.
He is therefore freed in Babylon who is shown to be saved from confusion itself through divine grace.
The prophet therefore speaks to the exiles when he rebukes those who have fallen from the state of righteousness to the vices of error in exile.

Chapter Four: Acceptable Offerings to God.

A gift is not accepted by almighty God from the hand when it is offered from a heart bound in malice. For the soul must first be cleansed if it wishes to offer a gift to God, because everything that is given to God is weighed from the mind of the giver.
Every stain of malice must be wiped from our inner person by transformation of thought, because an offering does not know how to placate the wrath of the judge unless it pleases him from the purity of the one offering. From Gregory's Moralia, book twenty-two, chapter fourteen.
In the book of Genesis, chapter four, verses four and five, it is written: 'The Lord had regard for Abel and for his offering, but for Cain and for his offering he had no regard.'
For the sacred text does not say: 'He had regard for the gifts of Abel, and had no regard for the gifts of Cain'; but first it says that he had regard for Abel, and then it added, 'and for his gifts.' And again it says that he did not regard Cain, and then added, 'nor his gifts.'
For what is given is received from the heart of the giver. Therefore it was not Abel from his gifts, but the gifts from Abel that pleased.
For first the Lord is read to have regarded the one who was giving, before the things he was giving. So that having heard this order of narration we may learn that exterior gifts are seasoned by interior purity of heart.
May the virtue of discernment teach each of us what he ought to be in himself when he provides exterior goods not only to God through the vow of offering, but also to neighbors.
The Lord does not wish to accept sacrifice from those who are in discord; he refuses to receive a burnt offering. From this it must be considered how great an evil discord is, on account of which even that is rejected through which fault is loosed. From Gregory's commentary on Ezekiel, book one, homily eight.
In the book of Ecclesiasticus, chapter thirty-four, verse twenty-four, it is written: 'One who offers sacrifice from the substance of the poor is like one who sacrifices a son in the sight of his father.' This is cited from Gregory's Pastoral Rule, part three, chapter twenty-one.
For what can be more intolerable than the death of a son before the eyes of his father? Thus it is shown with how much anger that sacrifice is regarded which is compared to the grief of a bereaved father.
It is one thing to do mercy for sins; it is another to sin for the sake of doing mercy.
And that cannot now even be called mercy, because it does not profit toward sweet fruit when it becomes bitter through the poison of a pestilent root.
The Lord reproves the sacrifices of wicked men through the prophet, saying in the book of Isaiah, chapter sixty-one, verse eight: 'I the Lord love justice and hate robbery in burnt offering.'
For many indeed take from the needy what they lavish on God. But with how much censure the Lord rejects them he demonstrates, saying in the book of Proverbs, chapter twenty-one, verse twenty-seven: 'The sacrifices of the wicked are abominable, which are offered from wickedness.'
Very often wicked men weigh how much they give to God through offering, but pretend not to consider how much they snatch away; they count the wage of their works as it were, and refuse to weigh the faults of their crimes.

Chapter Five: The Five Bodily Senses.

It is hidden from almost no one that the five senses of our body - namely sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch - in everything they sense and discern draw the power of discernment and sensation from the brain. From Gregory's Moralia, book eleven, chapter six.
And although there is one judge, the sense of the brain, which presides within, yet through proper channels it discerns the five senses.
Almighty God has worked with wonderful arrangement in the human race, so that the eye does not hear, nor the ear see, nor the mouth smell, nor the nose taste, nor the hands perceive odors.
And although all things are arranged by the one sense of the brain, yet any of these senses cannot do anything other than what it has received from the arrangement of the Creator.
From these bodily and exterior senses, interior and spiritual things are to be gathered, so that through what is public in us we should pass to what is secret in us and hidden from ourselves.
As in the Gospel, through five talents the knowledge of the five senses - that is, of exterior things - is expressed, from the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-five, verse fifteen. This is from Gregory's Gospel homilies, book one, homily nine.
But by two talents, understanding and action are shown. By the name of one talent, understanding alone is designated.
Everyone exists in the five senses of the body. But the doubled five makes ten. From Gregory's Gospel homilies, book one, homily twelve.
And because the multitude of the faithful is gathered from both sexes, the holy Church is proclaimed similar to ten virgins.
To guard the purity of the heart, discipline of the exterior senses must be kept by us. From Gregory's Moralia, book twenty-one, chapter two.
For however much virtue the mind may possess, however much seriousness it may be strong in, yet the fleshly senses prescribe something childish on the exterior.
And unless they are reined in by the weight of interior seriousness and by a certain youthful vigor as it were, they drag the weakened mind toward things fluid and frivolous.
Through sight we very often slide into fault, if we incautiously look upon what is not permitted.
And although the soul is invisible, it is in no way touched by delight in corporeal things, except that adhering to the body, it has the senses of that body as certain openings for going out.
The prophet Jeremiah, speaking of the senses of the body, says in chapter nine, verse twenty-one: 'Death has come up through our windows, it has entered our houses.'
For death ascends through the windows and enters the houses when concupiscence, coming through the senses of the body, breaks into the dwelling place of the mind.
Through the prophet Isaiah it is said of the just in chapter sixty, verse eight: 'Who are these that fly like clouds, and like doves to their windows?'
For the just are said to fly like clouds because they are lifted up from earthly contaminations, and they are like doves at their windows because through the senses of the body they do not regard exterior things with the intention of rapacity, and carnal concupiscence does not snatch them outward.
Holy Job, who as a most just judge presides over the received senses of the body like subject servants, sees faults before they come, and closes the windows of his body to death lying in ambush, saying in chapter thirty-one, verse one: 'I have made a covenant with my eyes not to think even about a virgin.'
Although the soul is invisible, it is in no way touched by delight in corporeal things, except that adhering to the body, it has the senses of that body as certain openings for going out.
The five senses of the body - namely sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch - are like certain roads of the mind by which it comes outward and desires those things that are outside its substance.
For through these senses of the body, as through certain windows, the soul regards all exterior things, and regarding them, it desires them.
Whoever incautiously looks outward through these windows of the body very often falls into the delight of sin even unwilling; and bound by desires, he begins to will what he did not will.
The headlong soul, when it does not take care beforehand lest it incautiously see what it may desire, afterwards begins blindly to desire what it has seen.
Hence also the mind of the prophet, which lifted up was often present at internal mysteries, because he incautiously saw another man's wife, afterwards darkened, he unlawfully joined her to himself. This refers to the second book of Kings, chapter eleven, verse two.

Chapter Six: Satan's Temptations and Demonic Deceptions.

The ancient enemy flies around the paths of the good with such skill in ambush that through those things which he has learned were done well by them, he seeks an approach to malice. From Gregory's Moralia, book thirty-three, chapter eight.
For from the same source where he sees one person giving something generously, from there he kindles another in the flame of discord.
And when he sees this one showing mercy, he persuades that one to be angry, so that while he insinuates that the good was done as if not commonly, he may cut off harmonious souls from the good of common grace.
Very often the ancient enemy, when he cannot break the minds of the just by persuading them to evils, strives to sow evils among them through good actions. But holy men conquer his snares all the more quickly, because they detect them all the more subtly.

Chapter 14: Pride and Vainglory.

The devil's pride became the occasion of our ruin, and God's humility became the means of our redemption.
What is more wretched than pride, which, while striving to rise above itself, distances itself from the height of true excellence? Pride is the beginning of all sin, as Scripture says in Ecclesiasticus, chapter ten, verse fifteen.
What is pride but an appetite for perverted excellence? For that excellence is perverted when the soul, abandoning the Source to which it should cling, somehow makes itself its own beginning and end.
For many, pride has often been the seedbed of lust, because while the spirit lifts them up as if to the heights, the flesh plunges them into the depths. Those who are first exalted by pride in the secret places of the heart later fall publicly, because while they swell inwardly with hidden motions of the heart, they collapse outwardly through open falls of the body.
The proud deserve to be struck by this just retribution: because by their pride they set themselves above other people, they should by lust be reduced even to resemblance with beasts of burden.
We must take care to guard the mind with every vigilance from the swelling of pride. For our thoughts do not fly emptily before God's eyes, and no moments of time pass through the soul without a status of retribution.
God sees within what exalts the mind, and therefore he permits to grow strong outwardly that which will cast it down. What is first exalted within is later struck down outwardly by the corruption of lust.
Hidden guilt of pride is followed by open punishment, so that inner sins are punished by outward evils, and the heart that swelled secretly collapses publicly.
Through the prophet Hosea, it is said against the Israelites, in the fifth chapter, verse four: A spirit of fornication is in their midst, and they have not known the Lord. To show that the cause of lust erupted from the fault of pride, he immediately added in verse five: And the arrogance of Israel shall testify to his face.
If a person through pride scorns his Creator, he rightly receives battle from his own subjected flesh. Therefore that first disobedient man, as soon as he sinned through pride, covered his shameful parts, as recounted in Genesis, chapter three, verse seven. Because he offered insult of spirit to God, he immediately discovered insult of the flesh.
And because he refused to be subject to his Creator, he lost control over the subjected flesh that he had governed, so that the confusion of his own disobedience might overflow into himself, and being overcome, he might learn what he lost by being exalted.
When a good deed is done, it is necessary that pride be first conquered in the heart, lest if it proceeds from the root of miserable intention, it produce bitter fruits of wickedness.
When pride of heart extends outwardly even to the body, it is first revealed through the eyes. For these, inflated by the disdain of swelling, look down as if from on high, and the more they debase themselves, the higher they lift themselves up.
Unless pride displayed itself through the eyes as through certain windows, the Psalmist would never have said to God, in Psalm seventeen, verse twenty-eight: You will save the humble people, and you will humble the eyes of the proud.
Unless pride poured itself out through the eyes, Solomon also would not have said concerning the pride of Judea, in Proverbs, chapter thirty, verse thirteen: A generation whose eyes are lofty, and whose eyelids are lifted up on high.
Very often the assertion of free speech accompanies the proud. They speak through the pride of arrogance, and yet they believe they speak through the freedom of righteousness.
Sometimes the proud are driven by the unbridled impulse of pride, under the guise of liberty, to rebuke what they should not, or to rebuke more than they should.
We should consider that we often correct the proud more effectively if we mix some elements of praise into our corrections.
For we must present to them either other good qualities that are actually in them, or at least mention what could be in them if they are not there. And only then should we cut away the evils that displease us, when the good things mentioned first have made their minds receptive to listening.
For we first touch untamed horses with a gentle hand, so that we may more fully subdue them afterward even with whips. And the sweetness of honey is added to a bitter cup of medicine, lest the harsh bitterness that will benefit health be felt in the very taste. While the taste is deceived by sweetness, the deadly humor is evacuated through bitterness.
In dealing with certain proud persons, the beginnings of rebuke must be tempered with praise, so that while they accept the favorable things they love, they may also receive the corrections they hate.
We can often better persuade the proud of useful things if we say that their progress will benefit us rather than them, if we request that their improvement be granted more for our sake than for theirs.
The proud, by the very fact that they desire to appear lofty, distance themselves far from the true essence of God through pride. They cannot subsist, because they are separated from the solidity of eternal essence, and they suffer this first ruin because through private glory they fall in themselves, as it is said through the Psalmist, in Psalm seventy-two, verse eighteen: You cast them down when they were lifted up. For they collapse inwardly to the degree that they wrongly rise outwardly.
Thus straw is swept up on high by the breath of wind, but by swift falling is called back to the lowest place. Thus smoke rises to the clouds, but suddenly dissipates into nothing by swelling. Thus mist rises from the lowest places by thickening; but the ray of the rising sun wipes it away as if it had never been.
Thus moisture is sprinkled on the surface of grass during the night hours, but is dried by the sudden heat of daylight. Thus foamy water bubbles, stirred up by beginning rains, emerge in competition from the depths; but they perish all the more quickly when burst, the higher they extend when inflated. And when they grow to become visible, by growing they accomplish their own non-existence.
For it is written, in Job, chapter fifteen, verse twenty: The wicked man is proud all his days. Even the elect are accustomed to take pride in some of their thoughts and actions. But because they are elect, they cannot be proud all their days, because before they finish life, they change their hearts from pride to the fear of humility.
Each wicked person is proud all his days, because he ends life in such a way that he scarcely departs from pride. He looks around at what flourishes temporarily, and neglects to consider what will be judged eternally. He places confidence in the life of the flesh, and believes that what he presently holds will endure for long.
The soul is solidified in pride, and every neighbor is brought into contempt. He never considers how sudden death creeps up; he never weighs how uncertain his happiness is.
No one should have been proud, even if he could have had certain knowledge of the number of his years, so that knowing how long he would live, he might know in advance when to remove himself from pride.
We must know that every proud person exercises tyranny according to his own measure. For what one person sometimes does in the state, that is, through received power of office, another does in the province, another in the city, another in his own household, and yet another exercises this through hidden wickedness within himself in his own thoughts.
Often the proud person weighs the present anger of the Supreme Judge, but does not turn away from evil, so that even that anger itself might be able to turn away from his destruction. With conscience accusing him, he fears being struck; but nevertheless he always increases that for which he will be struck.
Each proud person scorns his own return, despairs of pardon, and takes pride in guilt. Yet he has fear within as a witness to his wickedness. And although he seems to act boldly outwardly in evil things, he is nevertheless forced to tremble about these things within himself.
Through the prophet Isaiah, it is said in chapter thirty-four, verse five: My sword is drunk in heaven. As if he were saying openly: Consider with what anger I shall strike the proud of earth, if I did not spare from striking even those whom I created in heaven near me, on account of the vice of pride.

Chapter 15: Avarice.

Avarice, which is servitude to idols, as Paul says in his letter to the Ephesians, chapter five, verse five, holds the mouth of the heart open all around like a jar.
Many are dull in understanding, but are aroused by the goads of avarice in those things they desire. And those who are blind to seeing good things become vigilant in doing evil things when rewards stir them up.
Through the prophet Zechariah, concerning the quality of avarice, it is said in chapter five, verse six: This is their eye throughout all the earth. And behold, a talent of lead was being carried.
What is a talent of lead, except the weight of sin from that same avarice? Through lead, a metal whose nature is of heavy weight, the sin of avarice is especially designated, which renders the mind it has infected so heavy that it can in no way be lifted up to desire sublime things.
Greed is the root of all evils, as Paul says in his first letter to Timothy, chapter six, verse ten. And because every evil is generated through avarice, it is fitting that the house of avarice be constructed in stench.
The same prophet Zechariah said to the angel in chapter five, verse eleven: Where are these women carrying the jar? And he said to me: That a house may be built for it in the land of Shinar.
Shinar means their stench, because just as good odor comes from virtue, so conversely stench comes from the vice of greed.
We must know that Shinar is a very broad valley, in which a tower had begun to be built by the proud, which was destroyed when the diversity of languages was made. This tower was called Babylon, precisely because of that confusion of minds and languages.
And not undeservedly is the jar of avarice placed there where Babylon, that is confusion, is built, because since it is certain that all evils arise through avarice and impiety, rightly are this very avarice and impiety said to dwell in confusion.
People inflamed by the heat of avarice display greater works of themselves to human eyes, to the degree that they desire more abundant gifts to be offered to them by people.
In the book of blessed Job, it is written in chapter fifteen, verse thirty-four: Fire will devour the tents of those who willingly receive bribes.
For just as the body dwells in a tent, so the mind dwells in thought. But fire devours tents when the heat of avarice devastates thoughts.
When greedy people all burn together to be filled with riches, let them hear what is written in Proverbs, chapter twenty-eight, verse twenty: He who hastens to be enriched will not be innocent.
He who seeks to increase wealth neglects to avoid sin. And like a captured bird, when he greedily desires the bait of earthly things, he does not recognize the noose of sin by which he will be strangled.
When people often desire the gains of the present world and are ignorant of what losses they will suffer in the future, let them hear what is written in Proverbs, chapter twenty, verse twenty-one: An inheritance to which one hastens in the beginning will in the end lack blessing.
Those who hasten to inherit in the beginning cut off for themselves the lot of blessing in the end, because while they desire to multiply here through the wickedness of avarice, there they become disinherited from the eternal inheritance.
Greed often arises secretly in the mind, but openly produces the stings of all sins in deeds. The excellent preacher immediately points out these stings rising from this root, saying in his first letter to Timothy, chapter six, verse ten: Which some coveting have erred from the faith and have entangled themselves in many sorrows.
The prophet Isaiah, reproaching the human race for the immensity of avarice, says in chapter five, verse eight: Woe to you who join house to house and couple field to field, even to the boundary of the place. Will you alone dwell in the midst of the earth?
As if he were saying openly: How far do you extend yourselves, you who cannot in the least have partners in the common world? You oppress those joined to you, and you always find people against whom you can extend yourselves.

Chapter 16: Anger.

When anger frequently shatters the tranquility of the mind, it disturbs it as if torn and split apart, so that it does not agree with itself and loses the force of inner likeness.
Let us consider how great is the guilt of anger, through which, when gentleness is lost, the likeness of the divine image is corrupted. Through anger, wisdom is lost, so that what should be done and in what order is completely unknown, as it is written in Ecclesiastes, chapter seven, verse ten: Anger rests in the bosom of fools, because it certainly withdraws the light of understanding when it confuses the mind by moving it.
Through anger, life is lost, even if wisdom seems to be held, as it is written in Proverbs, chapter fifteen, verse one: Anger destroys even the prudent, because a confused soul in no way fulfills what it is able to understand prudently.
Through anger, justice is abandoned, as it is written in James, chapter one, verse twenty: The anger of man does not work the justice of God, because when the disturbed mind irritates the judgment of its own reason, it considers right everything that fury suggests.
Through anger, the grace of social life is lost, as it is written in Proverbs, chapter twenty-two, verses twenty-four and twenty-five: Do not be a companion to an angry man, lest you learn his ways and take scandal to your soul. Because he who does not temper himself by human reason must necessarily live alone like a beast.
Through anger, harmony is broken, as it is written in Proverbs, chapter fifteen, verse eighteen: A passionate man stirs up strife, and an angry man digs up sins. For the angry person digs up sins, because he also makes worse even the bad people whom he recklessly provokes to discord.
Through anger, the light of truth is lost, as it is written in Paul's letter to the Ephesians, chapter four, verse twenty-six: Let not the sun go down upon your anger. Because when anger strikes the darkness of confusion into the mind, God hides from it the ray of his knowledge.
Through anger, the splendor of the Holy Spirit is excluded. On the contrary, according to the ancient translation, it is written in Isaiah, chapter sixty-six, verse two: Upon whom shall my Spirit rest, but upon the humble and quiet person who trembles at my words? When he spoke of the humble, he immediately added the quiet. If therefore anger removes the quiet of the mind, it closes its dwelling place to the Holy Spirit.
By the withdrawal of the Holy Spirit, the soul emptied through anger is soon led to open madness and is dissipated even to the surface from the intimate foundation of thoughts.
For when the heart is inflamed by the goads of anger, it palpitates, the body trembles, the tongue stumbles over itself, the face burns, the eyes grow fierce, and familiar people are not recognized at all.
The mouth indeed forms a clamor, but the mind does not know what it is saying. Therefore, this person is in no way far from the demon-possessed, who is not conscious of his own action.
It often happens that anger leaps forth even to the hands, and the farther reason recedes, the more boldly it arises. And the soul cannot restrain itself, because it has become subject to an alien power. And fury exercises the limbs outwardly in blows, because inwardly it holds captive the very mind that is mistress of the limbs.
Sometimes a person through anger does not extend his hands, but turns his tongue into a spear of cursing. For he demands his brother's destruction through prayers, and desires God to accomplish what he himself, as a perverse person, either fears or is ashamed to do.
And so it happens that he commits murder by vow and voice, even when he ceases by hand from harming his neighbor. Sometimes anger imposes silence on the disturbed soul as if by judgment. And by not expressing itself outwardly through the tongue, it burns worse inwardly, so that the angry person withdraws his conversation from his neighbor and, by saying nothing, declares how averse he is.
And sometimes this severity of silence is practiced through the dispensation of discipline, if nevertheless the form of discretion is carefully preserved inwardly. Sometimes when the inflamed soul is restrained from customary speech, with the passage of time it is completely separated from love of neighbor. And sharper goads come to the mind as causes arise that exasperate more gravely, and in the eye of the angry person the speck turns into a beam as anger is transformed into hatred.
Often anger, when shut up in silence within the mind, burns more vehemently and forms silent shouting voices, hurls at itself words by which it is exasperated, and as if placed in examination of a case, responds more harshly when exasperated.
Sometimes the soul disturbed by anger feels greater tumult in its own silence, and the closed flame of anger consumes it more gravely.
We must know that anger inflames some more quickly and abandons them more easily, but moves others slowly yet holds them more severely. Some people, in anger, are like burning reeds: while they resound with voices, they produce certain sounds of their own ignition. They make flame more quickly, but immediately grow cold into ashes.
Often angry people receive ignition slowly, but once ignited they are extinguished with the greatest difficulty. And because they rouse themselves to harshness more slowly, they preserve the fire of their fury more severely.
Often people, which is worse, both receive the flames of anger more quickly and lay them down more slowly. But some both receive them slowly and lose them more quickly. In these four modes, the reader clearly recognizes that in regard to the good of tranquility, the last type approaches it more than the first, and in evil, the third surpasses the second.

Chapter 17: How Anger Should Be Restrained.

Broken anger ceases to possess the soul in two ways. The first is that the careful mind, before it begins to act in any way, should place before itself all the insults it can suffer, so that, thinking on the reproaches of its Redeemer, it may prepare itself for adversities.
It receives these coming adversities all the stronger because it armed itself more carefully through foreknowledge. He who is caught unprepared by adversity is found as if sleeping by an enemy, and the enemy kills him more quickly because he pierces one who does not resist.
For he who foreknows impending evils through care awaits hostile attacks vigilantly as if in ambush, and from there girds himself strongly for victory from where he was thought to be caught unknowing.
The soul must carefully meditate on all adversities before the beginnings of its action, so that always thinking on these things, always fortified against them with the breastplate of patience, it may overcome with foresight whatever comes, and consider whatever does not come as gain.
The second way of preserving gentleness is that when we observe the excesses of others, we should think on our own faults by which we have transgressed against others. Our own considered weakness excuses for us the evils of others.
For he patiently endures an injury inflicted, who piously remembers that he perhaps still has something in which he himself should be tolerated. The fire is extinguished as if by water when, as fury of soul arises, each person's own guilt is recalled to mind, because he is ashamed not to spare sins who often remembers that he sinned in ways needing to be spared by God or neighbor.
We must carefully know that there is one anger which impatience excites, and another which zeal forms. The former is generated from vice, the latter from virtue. If no anger arose from virtue, Phinehas would not have appeased the assault of divine punishment through the sword.
Because Eli did not have this anger, he stirred up the implacable motion of divine vengeance against himself. For to the degree that he was lukewarm against the vices of his subjects, to that degree did the strict anger of the eternal Ruler blaze against him.
The Psalmist says in Psalm four, verse five: Be angry and do not sin. Those who want us to be angry only with ourselves and not also with sinning neighbors certainly do not understand this correctly.
For if we are commanded to love our neighbors as ourselves, it follows that we should be angry at their errors just as at our own vices. Therefore through Solomon it is also said in Ecclesiastes, chapter seven, verse four: Anger is better than laughter, because through sadness of face the mind of the offender is corrected.
The same Psalmist says in Psalm six, verse eight: My eye is troubled because of anger. For anger through vice blinds the eye of the mind, but anger through zeal disturbs it, because when someone is shaken at least by the emulation of righteousness, that contemplation which can only be perceived with a tranquil heart is scattered.
Often the zeal of righteousness, because it agitates the mind with restlessness, immediately obscures its keenness, so that it does not see higher things in commotion which it previously perceived well when tranquil. But from there it is more subtly led back to high things from where it is temporarily beaten back so as not to see.
This right emulation of zeal through gentleness, after a little while, opens the eye more abundantly in tranquility of mind in eternal matters, which meanwhile closes it through disturbance. And from where the mind is disturbed so as not to see, from there it profits so as to shine more truly for seeing.
When salve is applied to a weak eye, light is completely denied. But from there it truly receives light after a little while, from where it temporarily and beneficially loses it.

Chapter 18: Envy.

We cannot envy except those whom we consider better than ourselves in some way. Therefore, he who is killed by envy is small, because he bears witness to himself that he is lesser than the one by whose envy he is tormented.
The cunning enemy stole up on the first man by envying him because, having lost blessedness, he recognized himself as lesser than his immortality.
Cain fell to committing fratricide, as recounted in Genesis, chapter four, verses five through seven, because, his sacrifice having been despised, he raged that one was preferred to him whose offering God accepted. And he cut off the one whom he dreaded to be better than himself, lest he exist in any way.
Esau blazed forth to persecution of his brother for this reason: because, having lost the blessing of the firstborn which he himself had sold for eating lentils, he groaned that he was lesser than the one whom he preceded in birth, as recounted in Genesis, chapter twenty-five, verse thirty-four, and chapter twenty-seven, verse forty-one.
His brothers sold holy Joseph to passing Ishmaelites for this reason: because, the mystery of revelation having been known, lest he become better than them, they tried to obstruct his advancement, as told in Genesis, chapter thirty-seven, verses twenty-seven and twenty-eight.
King Saul pursued his subject David by hurling a spear, because he feared that the one whom he perceived daily growing more in the successes of virtues would grow beyond himself, as narrated in the First Book of Samuel, chapter eighteen, verse eleven.
He who is killed by envy is small, because unless he himself were inferior, he would not grieve over the good of another.
We must know most especially that although through every vice that is committed, the poison of the ancient enemy is poured into the human heart, yet in this wickedness the serpent shakes all his entrails and vomits forth the plague of malice to be imprinted.
Concerning this it is certainly written in the Book of Wisdom, chapter two, verse twenty-four: Through the envy of the devil, death entered into the world.
For when the rottenness of envy has corrupted the conquered heart, even the exterior things indicate how gravely madness goads the soul. Through envy, color is affected with pallor, and eyes are cast down, the mind is inflamed, and limbs grow cold. Rage comes into thought, grinding into teeth. And when growing hatred is hidden in the hiding places of the heart, the enclosed wound darkens conscience with blind pain.
Nothing about one's own things brings joy, because his own punishment wounds the wasting mind, which is tormented by the happiness of another. And to the degree that the structure of another's work is raised on high, to that degree is the foundation of the envious mind dug deeper beneath, so that as others hasten to better things, it itself collapses worse. By which ruin even that which was thought to have arisen in other actions through completed work is destroyed.
For envy, when it has wasted the mind, consumes all the good deeds it has found. Through the most wise Solomon it is said in Proverbs, chapter fourteen, verse thirty: The life of the flesh is health of heart; envy is rottenness of bones.
For what is signified by flesh except certain weak and tender things? And what by bones except strong deeds? And it often happens that some people, with true innocence of heart, seem weak in some of their actions, while others already exercise certain strong things before human eyes, yet nevertheless waste away inwardly with the pestilence of envy toward the good things of others.
Well therefore is it said: The life of the flesh is health of heart, because if innocence of mind is guarded, even if there are weak things outwardly, they are sometimes strengthened. And it is rightly added: Envy is rottenness of bones, because through the vice of envy, even strong acts of virtues perish before God's eyes. For bones to rot is for certain even strong things to perish through envy.

Chapter 19: Suppressing Envy.

For it is difficult that one not envy another what the other desires to obtain, because whatever temporal thing is received becomes so much less for individuals as it is divided among many. And therefore envy torments the mind of the desirer, because what he desires, either another receiving it completely takes it away, or restricts it from its quantity.
He who desires to be fully free from the plague of envy, let him love that inheritance which the number of co-heirs does not narrow—which is both one for all and whole for individuals, which is shown all the more generous as the multitude of receivers is expanded to it.
The lessening of envy is affection arising from inner sweetness, and its full death is perfect love of eternity.
When a person is perfectly seized in love of the heavenly homeland, he is also fully solidified in love of neighbor without any envy, because when he desires nothing earthly, there is nothing to contradict his charity toward neighbor.
What is true charity other than the eye of the mind lacking envy? If it is touched by the dust of earthly love, it is immediately struck back injured from the gaze of inner light.
Because he who loves earthly things is small, and he who desires eternal things is great, it can also be understood not inappropriately thus: Envy kills the little one, as Job says in chapter five, verse two, because one does not die from the languor of this plague unless he is still weak in desires.

Chapter 20: Malice.

In the Gospel, Truth says in Matthew, chapter seven, verse twelve: Whatever you wish that people would do to you, do also to them. By these two commandments of both testaments, through one malice is restrained, through the other kindness is commanded, so that by not doing the evil that one does not wish to suffer, one ceases from the work of harming.
We must take great care that each person show the gentleness of long-suffering toward the insolent, that he display the grace of kindness to those languishing with the plague of malice, that he unite the discordant in peace, and gird the harmonious toward desire for true peace.
The Lord Jesus Christ, reproving all malicious people, says in Matthew, chapter seven, verse three: Why do you see the speck in your brother's eye, but do not notice the beam in your own eye?
For the disturbance of impatience is a speck; but malice in the heart is a beam in the eye. For the breeze of temptation agitates that, but the consummation of wickedness carries this almost immovably.
And rightly it is added there: Hypocrite, first cast the beam out of your own eye, and then you will see to cast the speck out of your brother's eye.
As if it were said to the iniquitous mind suffering inwardly and demonstrating itself holy outwardly through patience: first shake off from yourself the mass of malice, and then reprove others for the levity of impatience, lest while you do not strive to conquer malice, it be worse for you to tolerate the evil things of others.
The most wicked heart wastes away from its own malice and not from another's, as it is written according to the ancient version in Isaiah, chapter sixteen, verse eleven: Zeal has seized the uneducated people, and it does not consume adversaries with signs.
But just as the fire of love lifts up the mind, so the fire of malice envelops it, because the Holy Spirit elevates the heart it fills, and the burning of malice always bends it toward lower things.
Fire torments the wicked not only afterward through vengeance, but even now burns them through envy, because those who are to be punished afterward by the punishment of retribution now afflict themselves with the torment of malice.

Chapter 21: Discord.

The discordant must be admonished to know most certainly that, however great the virtues they possess, they can in no way become spiritual if they neglect to be united with their neighbors through harmony.
Therefore, one in no way attains to the one hope of calling if one does not run toward it with mind united with neighbors.
Often some people, to the degree that they receive certain special gifts, lose by pride the gift of harmony, which is greater, so that if perhaps someone subdues the flesh beyond others by restraint of gluttony, he scorns to harmonize with those he surpasses by abstaining.
He who separates abstinence from harmony should consider what the Psalmist admonishes, for he says in Psalm fifty, verse four: Praise him with timbrel and chorus.
For in the timbrel, dry and beaten skin resounds, but in the chorus, voices harmonize in fellowship. Whoever therefore afflicts the body but abandons harmony praises God indeed with the timbrel, but does not praise him in chorus.
Often when greater knowledge lifts up certain people, it separates them from fellowship with others, and as if the more they know, the more they become foolish away from the virtue of harmony.
The better someone knows, the worse he sins by abandoning harmony. And therefore he will inexcusably deserve punishment, because prudently, if he had wished, he could have avoided sin.
To certain people departing from harmony, James rightly says in chapter three, verses fourteen, fifteen, and seventeen: If you have bitter jealousy and contentions in your hearts, do not boast and be false to the truth. This is not wisdom descending from above, but earthly, sensual, demonic. But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable.
Pure, namely, because it understands chastely; but peaceable, because through pride it in no way discords from the charity of neighbors.
It is written in Matthew, chapter five, verse twenty-eight: If you offer your gift at the altar and there remember that your brother has something against you, leave your gift there before the altar, and go first to be reconciled to your brother, and then coming you shall offer your gift.
From this precept we must consider whose sacrifice is rejected, how intolerable the fault is shown to be. Since all evils are washed away by good deeds following, let us consider how great are the evils of discord, which, unless they are completely extinguished, do not permit good to follow.
The discordant must be admonished that if they turn their ears away from heavenly commands, they should open the eyes of their mind to consider those things that dwell in the lowest places.

Chapter 22: Hatred.

If we keep silent from reproving people because we fear that hatreds will rise against us, we doubtless seek not God's gain but our own.
We must know greatly that sometimes when the wicked are reproved, they become worse and pursue us with great hatreds. Therefore we spare them, not ourselves, if we cease from reproving them out of love for them.
It is necessary for us sometimes to tolerate by keeping silent what hateful people are, so that by living among us they may learn what they are not.
The righteous person should not at all fear that someone, when corrected, will inflict insults, but rather that, drawn to hatred, he may become worse.
We must take utmost care lest talkativeness immoderately drag the tongue and extend it even to the wantonness of slander, lest it stir up the hatred of malice and bend the mouth even to the spear of cursing.
In the Gospel, Truth says in Matthew, chapter seven, verse twelve: Whatever you wish that people would do to you, do also to them. As if he were saying openly: What you hate another to do to you, see that you do not do to another through hatred, as it says in Tobit, chapter four, verse sixteen.

Chapter 23: Lust of the Eyes.

Whoever looks outwardly carelessly through the windows of the body often falls into the delight of sin even unwillingly, and bound by desires begins to will what he did not will.
The rash soul, because it does not foresee beforehand lest it carelessly see what it might desire, afterward begins blindly to desire what it saw. Therefore the mind of the prophet, which lifted up often dwelt in inner mysteries, when he carelessly saw another's wife, afterward darkened, unlawfully joined her to himself, as told in the Second Book of Samuel, chapter eleven, verse two.
The holy man, because with the senses of the body received as subject servants he presides as a most just judge, perceives faults before they come and closes the windows of the body as if to death lying in ambush, saying in Job, chapter thirty-one, verse one: I have made a covenant with my eyes, that I would not even think about a virgin, lest they carelessly look first at what he would afterward love unwillingly.
Once the form of beauty has been bound to the heart through the eyes, it is scarcely loosened by the hand of great struggle. Therefore, lest we turn over certain slippery things in thought, we must take care that we should not gaze upon what it is not lawful to desire.
That the pure mind may be preserved in thought, the eyes must be cast down from the wantonness of their pleasure, as if they were certain robbers to guilt. For Eve would not have touched the forbidden tree unless she had first looked at it carelessly. For it is written in Genesis, chapter three, verse six: The woman saw that the tree was good for food and beautiful to the eyes and delightful to behold, and she took of its fruit and ate.
We must consider most especially with what restraint we who live mortally must restrict our sight toward illicit things, if even Eve, mother of the living, came to death through her eyes.
Under the voice of Judea, which, desiring by seeing outward things, had lost inner goods, the prophet says in Lamentations, chapter three, verse fifty-one: My eye has plundered my soul. For by desiring visible things, it lost invisible virtues. Therefore, she who lost inner fruit through outer sight bore the plunder of the heart through the eye of the body.
It is written in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter five, verse twenty-seven: Everyone who looks at a woman to lust after her has already committed adultery with her in his heart. Through Moses, lust performed is condemned, but through the author of purity, lust thought is condemned.

Chapter 24: The Desire of Gluttony.

We must know that the vice of gluttony tempts us in five ways. Sometimes it anticipates the times of need. Sometimes it does not anticipate the time, but seeks more sumptuous foods. Sometimes, whatever is to be consumed, it desires to be prepared more carefully. Sometimes it agrees with both the quality of foods and the time, but exceeds the measure of moderate refreshment in the very quantity of consumption.
Sometimes what it desires is even more lowly, yet it sins worse by the very burning of immense desire.
We show the times of vices better if we prove these things by clearer examples. For Jonathan earned the sentence of death from his father's mouth because in tasting honey he went before the established time for eating, as told in the First Book of Samuel, chapter fourteen, verse twenty-seven.
The people led out of Egypt died in the desert because, despising the manna, they sought foods of meat which they considered more sumptuous, as recounted in Numbers, chapter twenty-one, verse five.
The first guilt of the sons of Eli arose because according to their wish the servant of the priest would not receive cooked meats from the sacrifice in the ancient manner, but sought raw ones which he would present more carefully, as told in the First Book of Samuel, chapter two, verse twelve and following.
When it is said to Jerusalem in Ezekiel, chapter sixteen, verse forty-nine: This was the iniquity of your sister Sodom: pride, fullness of bread, and abundance, it is openly shown that she therefore lost salvation because with the vice of pride she exceeded the measure of moderate refreshment.
Esau therefore lost the glory of the firstborn because with great burning of desire he coveted vile food, that is, lentils, which when he preferred even to the rights of the firstborn being sold, he indicated with what appetite he panted for it.
For it is not the food but the appetite that is in the vice. Therefore we often take more sumptuous foods without guilt, and taste lowlier ones not without blame of conscience.
Esau lost the primacy through eating lentils, and Elijah in the desert preserved the strength of his body by eating meat, as told in the Third Book of Kings, chapter seventeen, verse six.
The ancient enemy, because he understands that not food but the desire for food is the cause of damnation, subjected the first man to himself not by meat but by fruit, and tempted the second not by meat but by bread, as told in Genesis, chapter three, verse six, and Matthew, chapter four, verse three.
Often the guilt of the first parent is committed even when lowly and cheap things are consumed. For Adam alone did not receive the command of prohibition to refrain from the forbidden fruit. For when God indicates certain foods as contrary to our health, he calls us back from these as if through a sentence.
And when we touch harmful things with desire, what else do we taste but forbidden things? Those things are to be taken in food which the necessity of nature requires, not what the lust of eating suggests, lest if moderate discretion looks ahead less carefully, someone may immerse himself in the abyss of illicit desire.
Those devoted to gluttony are accompanied by superfluity of speech, levity of work, and lust. Unless immoderate talkativeness seized those devoted to gluttony, the rich man who is said to have feasted splendidly every day would not burn more severely in his tongue.
For he says in Luke, chapter sixteen, verse twenty-four: Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.
By these words it is certainly shown that by feasting daily he had sinned more frequently in his tongue, he who burning entirely required to be cooled especially in his tongue.
Because levity of work immediately follows those devoted to gluttony, sacred authority testifies, saying in Exodus, chapter thirty-two, verse six: The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.
Often gluttony drags one even to lust, because when the belly is extended by satiety, the goads of desire are aroused.
To the cunning enemy, who opened the sense of the first man in the desire for fruit but bound him in the snare of sin, it is said by divine voice in Genesis, chapter three, verse fourteen: On your breast and belly you shall crawl. As if it were openly said to him: By thought and gluttony you shall dominate over human hearts.
Because lust follows those devoted to gluttony, the prophet testifies, who while narrating open things, denounces hidden things, saying according to the Hebrew text and the Seventy in Jeremiah, chapter thirty-nine: The chief of the cooks destroyed the walls of Jerusalem.
For the chief of the cooks is the belly, to which great care of service is rendered by cooks, so that it itself may be filled delightfully with foods. But the walls of Jerusalem are the virtues of the soul, elevated to the desire of heavenly peace. Therefore the chief of the cooks casts down the walls of Jerusalem, because while the belly is stretched by gluttony, the virtues of the soul are destroyed through lust.

Chapter 25: The Battle of Virtues Against Vices.

When we contradict the lord of vices, when we struggle against iniquity which separates us from God, when we resist custom strongly and violently, and trampling perverse desires, vindicate for ourselves against it the right of innate liberty, we resist the armies of vices in the fiercest conflict.
When we strike down faults by repenting and wash away the stains of filth with tears, we struggle strongly against vices.
Then holy men more truly cleanse themselves from the flood of vices when individual virtues are opposed by them against individual vices.
Sometimes vices conflict with virtues for benefit, so that by the very contest, either the mind is exercised, or the soul shaken from pride is restrained.
We must fight against the assaults of vices with contrary virtues. For against lust of heart, purity must be applied; against hatred, love must be prepared; against anger, patience must be set forth. Furthermore, against fear, the virtue of confidence must be applied; against torpor, the battle of zeal.
Also joy must be opposed to sadness, fortitude to sloth, generosity to avarice, humility to pride. And thus individual virtues repress the vices arising against them, and extinguish the movements of temptations by the virtue of divine charity.
Abstinence tames lust. For to the degree that the body is broken by fasting, to that degree the mind is called back from illicit appetite. Tolerance fights against anger. But anger kills itself, and by enduring, patience carries victory.
Hope of eternal joy overcomes the grief of sadness; and whom the troubled mind afflicts concerning exterior things, the sweetness of inner tranquility soothes. Against envy let charity be prepared, and against the fires of anger let the tranquility of gentleness be applied.

Chapter 30: The Sin of Lust

The evil of lust is committed either by thought or by deed. When our cunning adversary is expelled from accomplishing the physical act, he secretly works to pollute our thoughts. The Lord says to the serpent: You shall crawl on your breast and belly. The serpent crawls on its belly when the slippery enemy exercises lust through human members subjected to him all the way to the completion of the deed.
But the serpent crawls on its breast when it pollutes in thought those whom it cannot corrupt in lustful action. Whoever commits lust in deed—for him the serpent crawls from the belly. Whoever turns it over in his mind—for him the serpent crawls from the breast. To flee as from burning Sodom is to turn away from the unlawful fires of the flesh.
Whoever is lifted up by worldly success and feels himself tempted by the goads of lust through the seduction of heartfelt pleasure should call to mind what Joseph did, and guard himself in the fortress of chastity. When slippery pleasure tempts us in prosperity, we must set these very prosperities against the sting of temptation, so that we are ashamed to commit evil in the very moment we remember receiving gratuitous goods from God.
Sometimes the pleasure born from prosperity must be struck down by considering that very prosperity, so that our enemy dies from the same source that gave him birth. The prophet David fell suddenly through lust when, walking on his rooftop, he desired and seized another man's wife, then killed her husband at the cost of his own army. He fell in sudden collapse when that mind, accustomed to heavenly mysteries, was conquered by unexpected temptation and subjugated to monstrous depravity. As the Second Book of Samuel, chapter eleven, verse four recounts.
He was like a stone moved from its place when the prophet's soul, shut out from the mysteries of prophecy, turned to thinking about depravities. Solomon, once the wisest of men, was overcome by excessive lust and led by immoderate and constant use of women to the point where he built a temple for idols. He who had previously constructed a temple for God was not afraid, through the constancy of his lust and subjection to faithlessness, to construct temples for idols.
And so it happened that from constant carnal wantonness he arrived at faithlessness of mind, because as sin's influence gradually crept in, the soil of his heart flowed away to complete ruin. Not undeservedly are those called beasts of the earth who seek the lowest things of this carnal life, whom enticing pleasure casts down into the depths, to whom it is said in sacred Scripture: Do not become like the horse and mule, in which there is no understanding. As the Psalm, thirty-one, verse nine says.
To lovers of fleshly pleasures it is said: Put to death now your members which are upon the earth, that is, fornication, uncleanness, lust, evil desire, and avarice. As Paul writes in his letter to the Colossians, chapter three, verse five. Paul the apostle rebukes those devoted to carnal wantonness with public denunciation, saying: When they had known God, they did not glorify him as God or give thanks, but became vain in their thoughts. As he writes in his letter to the Romans, chapter one, verse twenty-one.
How they fell into the pleasure of beasts, or even worse than beasts, he added by saying: He delivered them up to the desires of their heart unto uncleanness, as Romans, chapter one, verse twenty-four says. Some were plunged by the flesh into the depths through lust, whom proud knowledge had lifted up on high, and they fell from the flight of birds beyond desire into the appetite of beasts.
And they were cast down below themselves from the very place where they seemed to be going above themselves. Often the poison of lust is born from the root of pride. The flesh conquers when the spirit secretly swells, because the soul fell into the wantonness of beasts through the origin of fault when, exalting itself in the manner of birds, it flew higher than it should have.
Sometimes through the vice of pride, long continence is suddenly dissolved, and often virginity preserved until old age is corrupted. Because humility of heart is neglected, the righteous judge scorns even bodily integrity. And sometimes through open evil he announces as reprobate those whom he had long tolerated as reprobate in secret.
Whoever suddenly lost a good long preserved held within himself another evil, from which he suddenly burst forth into another, through which he stood alien from almighty God even when he showed himself clinging to God through bodily purity. Often mental pride drags one down to pollution of the flesh, and plunges the heart of the reprobate from the flight of birds to the wantonness of beasts.
We must know well that it is one thing what the mind suffers from temptation of the flesh, and another when it is bound to pleasures through consent. Often it is struck by perverse thought but resists. Often when it conceives something perverse, it turns this over within itself even through desire. And certainly an unclean thought in no way pollutes the mind when it knocks, but when it subjugates the mind to itself through delight.
Paul the excellent preacher says: Let no temptation take hold of you but such as is human. As he writes in his first letter to the Corinthians, chapter ten, verse thirteen. Human temptation is that by which we are often touched in thought even unwillingly, because when sometimes even unlawful things come to the mind, we certainly have this in ourselves from the weight of corruptible humanity. Demonic and not human is the temptation when the mind binds itself by consent to what the corruptibility of flesh suggests.
The same apostle Paul says: Let not sin reign in your mortal body, as in his letter to the Romans, chapter six, verse twelve. He forbade sin to reign in the mortal body, not to exist there, because in corruptible flesh it cannot reign but cannot help but exist. For the human race, to be tempted by sin is sin. Because as long as we live we cannot be perfectly free of this in every way, holy preaching, since it could not expel this, took away its kingdom from the dwelling place of our heart, so that even if illicit appetite often inserts itself secretly like a thief into our good thoughts, at least if it enters, it does not dominate.
In Genesis it is written: The Lord rained down sulfur and fire upon Sodom and Gomorrah, as in Genesis, chapter nineteen, verse twenty-four. What is expressed in sulfur but the stench of flesh, and what by fire but the burning of carnal desire? When the Lord decreed to punish the fleshly crimes of those dwelling in Sodom or Gomorrah, in the very quality of the punishment he marked the stain of the crime. Sulfur has a stench, fire has burning. Those who had burned with perverse desires from the stench of flesh, it was fitting that they perish by both sulfur and fire together, so that from just punishment they might learn what they had done from unjust desire.

Chapter 31: Spiritual Torpor and Negligence

Often the human mind, sleeping from concern for its own watchfulness, is struck and feels no pain, because just as it does not foresee coming evils, so neither does it recognize what it has done. It is dragged along and feels nothing, because it is led by the enticements of vices yet is not roused to guard itself.
Although one is weighed down by the sleep of torpor from guarding oneself, one strives to stay awake for worldly concerns, so as always to be intoxicated by pleasures. And when one sleeps concerning that in which one ought skillfully to keep watch, one desires to be awake for something else, for which one could laudably have slept.
Through Solomon in Proverbs it is said: And you will be like one sleeping in the middle of the sea, and like a drowsy helmsman who has lost the rudder. As Proverbs, chapter twenty-three, verse thirty-four records. For he sleeps in the middle of the sea who, placed in the temptations of this world, neglects to foresee the movements of rushing vices like impending heaps of waves. And he loses the rudder like a helmsman when the mind loses its diligent care for steering the ship of the body.
To lose the rudder at sea is not to maintain provident intention amid the storms of this age. For if the helmsman holds the rudder carefully, now he steers the ship directly against the waves, now he cuts through the force of the winds at an angle.
It is written: The lizard strives with its hands, and dwells in the palaces of the king. As Proverbs, chapter thirty, verse twenty-eight says. Often birds, which the feather lifts to flight, dwell in thickets; and the lizard, which has no feathers for flight, striving with its hands holds the building of the kingdom. Because certainly often clever people, while they grow torpid through negligence, remain in evil deeds; and simple people, whom the feather of talent does not help, the virtue of action lifts to obtain the walls of the eternal kingdom.
The lizard, while striving with its hands, dwells in the king's buildings, because the simple person arrives there through the intention of right action where the clever person scarcely ascends. A question arises: why is the gift of understanding granted to the negligent, or why is any diligent person hindered by slowness of perception?
To which the answer is quickly given, when it is immediately added: Nothing on earth is without cause. As the book of Job, chapter five, verse six says. For often the lazy person receives talent, from which the negligent person is even more justly punished. Because what he could attain without labor, he scorns to know. And therefore sometimes the diligent person is burdened by slowness of understanding, so that he may find greater rewards of recompense the more he labors in the study of discovery.
Therefore nothing is on earth without cause, when both slowness profits the diligent person toward reward, and swiftness grows toward punishment for the lazy person. Mental sloth, when not kindled by appropriate fervor, is utterly slain from the desire of good things as torpor secretly grows strong.
Through Solomon it is said: Laziness sends deep sleep. As Proverbs, chapter nineteen, verse fifteen records. For the lazy person seemingly keeps watch by right perception, though he grows torpid by doing nothing; but laziness is said to send deep sleep because gradually even the vigilance of right perception is lost when one ceases from the zeal of doing good.
Concerning torpor of the soul it is rightly written in Proverbs: The slack soul shall hunger. Whoever does not direct himself upward by constraint expands himself downward through desires by neglect; and while not constrained by the vigor of lofty pursuits, he is wounded by the hunger of base desire, so that where he refuses to bind himself through discipline, there he scatters himself hungering through desires for pleasures.
Hence by the same Solomon it is written again: Every idle person is in desires. As Proverbs, chapter twenty-one, verse twenty-six says. Hence with Truth itself preaching, when one spirit goes out, the house is said to be clean, but when it returns multiplied, while it is vacant, it is occupied. As the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twelve, verses forty-four and forty-five records.

Chapter 32: The Vice of Laziness

The lazy must be persuaded lest they lose good things to be done by delaying them, and lest when they are unwilling to do opportunely what they can, shortly after, when they wish to, they are unable. Often the lazy person, while neglecting to do necessary things, sets up certain difficulties for himself, and carelessly fears certain things; and while he seemingly finds what he might justly fear, he shows that he does not unjustly grow torpid in idleness.
For to the lazy person it is said through Solomon: Because of the cold the lazy person refused to plow; therefore he will beg in summer, and it will not be given to him. As Proverbs, chapter twenty, verse four says. Because of the cold indeed the lazy person does not plow, while constrained by the torpor of sloth, he pretends not to do the good things he ought. And while he fears small evils from opposition, he neglects to work the greatest things. But well is it added: He will beg in summer, and it will not be given to him.
For he who does not now sweat in good works, when the more fervent sun of judgment appears, because he seeks in vain the entrance to the kingdom, begs in summer receiving nothing. Hence it is written again: The lazy person hides his hand under his armpit, and does not bring it to his mouth. As Proverbs, chapter nineteen, verse twenty-four says. Therefore no one is so lazy that he considers it labor to bring his hand to his mouth even for eating.
But the lazy person does not bring his hand to his mouth, because he does not even want to do what he says. For by the hand action is designated, but by the mouth speech. It is labor for the lazy person to bring his hand to his mouth, because any slothful preacher does not even want to do what he says. To bring the hand to the mouth is to make one's action accord with one's voice.
The same Solomon says: I passed by the field of the lazy man, and by the vineyard of the foolish man; and behold, nettles had filled everything: thorns had covered its surface, and the stone wall was destroyed. As Proverbs, chapter twenty-four, verse thirty records. To pass through the field of the lazy man and through the vineyard of the foolish man is to inspect the life of any negligent person and to consider his works.
Which nettles or thorns fill, because in the heart of the negligent, itching earthly desires and the stings of vices sprout. The stone wall was destroyed, that is, the discipline of the fathers was dissolved from his heart. For because he saw that the destroyed stone wall was dissolved discipline, immediately following he added: When I had seen this, I laid it up in my heart, and by example I learned discipline. As Proverbs, chapter twenty-four, verse thirty-two says.
When the vigor of discipline in the heart of the reprobate is dissolved with laziness dominating, all good works are held in contempt before their eyes. And they consider as nothing whatever they see of the virtues of the elect.

Chapter 33: The Sin of Murmuring

If vinegar is poured on soda, the soda boils up, as it is written: Like vinegar on soda, so is one who sings songs to a wicked heart. The perverse mind, when it is corrected by rebuke or persuaded to good things by the sweetness of preaching, becomes worse from the correction. And it is inflamed in the iniquity of murmuring from that very thing by which it ought to have been restrained from iniquity.
Whoever is struck for sin, unless he resists by murmuring, begins already to be just by the very fact that he does not accuse the justice of the one striking him.

Chapter 34: The Evil of Lying

The way of truth is entirely level, and the path of lying is burdensome, as it is written: They have taught their tongue to speak lies; they have labored to act wickedly. As the prophet Jeremiah, chapter nine, verse five says. Whoever, abandoning truth, decides to lie in order to deceive the mind of listeners—how great is the labor for him to carefully guard lest his very deception be detected?
For he sets before his eyes what might be answered to him by those who know the truth, and with great thought he considers how through arguments of falsehood to overcome the proofs of truth. The laboring deception of lying covers itself on all sides, and against this, where it might be detected, seeks a response similar to truth; who if he wanted to speak truth, certainly could have done so without labor.
Every lie is iniquity, and all iniquity is a lie, because certainly whatever disagrees with truth deviates from equity. Sometimes it is worse to meditate on a lie than to speak it. For to speak is often a matter of rashness, but to meditate is deliberate wickedness; and who does not know in how great a distance the fault is distinguished: whether someone lies from haste or from deliberation?
Every lie must be avoided with utmost care, although sometimes there is a kind of lie that is a lighter fault, if someone lies to benefit another. It is written: The mouth that lies kills the soul. As the book of Wisdom, chapter one, verse eleven says. And: You will destroy those who speak lies. As the Psalm, five, verse seven records.
Perfect men also flee this kind of lie with utmost care, so that neither is anyone's life defended through their deception, nor do they harm their own souls while striving to benefit another's flesh, although we believe this very kind of sin is most easily forgiven. For if any fault is usually purged by subsequent pious action, how much more easily is this wiped away, which piety itself, the mother of good work, accompanies?
Some try to assert from the deception of the midwives that this kind of lie is not a sin, especially because of them who lied it is written: Because the Lord built houses for them. As the book of Exodus, chapter one, verse twenty-one says. In the recompense of the Egyptian midwives it is known what the fault of lying deserves. For the reward of their kindness, which could have been repaid to them in eternal life, was turned aside into earthly compensation because of the mixed fault of lying, so that in their life, which they wanted to protect by lying, they received the good things they had done, and had no further reward of their recompense to expect.
If carefully considered, the Egyptian midwives lied from love of the present life, not from intention of reward. For by sparing they attempted to cover the life of the infants by lying about their own actions. And although some such things can be found in the Old Testament, the diligent reader will almost never find this or such a kind of lie admitted by the perfect ones there.
For just as a building is constructed with stones, so a lie is fabricated with words. Where there is not deceitful speech but the sense of truth, a fortified mass rises not from construction but from nature. Blessed Job says to his friends who were not thinking rightly: Does God need your lie, that you should speak deceits for him? As the book of Job, chapter thirteen, verse seven records. God does not need a lie, because truth does not seek to be supported by the help of falsehood.

Chapter 35: The Four Stages of Sin

Sin is committed in the heart in four ways, and consummated in deed in four ways. In the heart it is committed by suggestion, delight, consent, and the audacity of defense. Suggestion happens through the adversary, delight through the flesh, consent through the spirit, the audacity of defense through pride.
Often the fault that should have terrified the mind exalts it, and by casting down lifts up, but more gravely by lifting up overthrows. Hence the ancient enemy broke the uprightness of the first man with these four blows: for the serpent persuaded, Eve was delighted, Adam consented; and when questioned he refused through audacity to confess the fault.
What happened in the first parent of our race is enacted daily in the human race. The serpent persuaded, because the hidden enemy secretly suggests evils to the hearts of people. Eve was delighted, because the carnal sense immediately submits itself to delight at the serpent's words. But Adam himself, placed in charge, gave assent to the woman, because when the flesh is seized by delight, even the spirit, weakened from its uprightness, inclines.
When questioned, Adam refused to confess the fault, because clearly the spirit, which is separated from truth by sinning, is more wickedly hardened in the audacity of its ruin. Indeed Adam had fled to hide himself through fear, but when questioned it became clear how much he swelled even while fearing.
For when present punishment is feared from sin, and the lost face of God is not loved, the fear comes from swelling, not from humility: for he is proud who does not abandon sin if he could avoid being punished. Just as sin is committed in the heart in four ways—namely suggestion, delight, consent, and the audacity of defense—so also sin is consummated in deed in four ways.
First the hidden fault is done; afterward the guilt is revealed even before the eyes of people without shame, then it is led into habit; finally it is nourished either by the seductions of false hope or by the obstinacy of wretched desperation.
In the first parent we learned that we commit all wickedness of fault in three ways: namely by suggestion, delight, and consent. The first is committed through the enemy, the second through the flesh, the third through the spirit. For the tempter suggests evil things, the flesh subjects itself to delight, and finally the spirit, conquered by delight, consents.
The ancient serpent suggested evil things in paradise, Eve as flesh submitted herself to delight, but Adam as spirit, overcome by suggestion and delight, gave assent. By the devil's suggestion we sometimes recognize sin, by delight we are conquered, by consent we are even bound.
Hence we must cry out with the Apostle: Wretched man that I am, who will deliver me from this body of death? So that we may hear the consolation that follows: The grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. As Paul writes in his letter to the Romans, chapter seven, verses twenty-four and twenty-five.
Often one and the same sin is both punishment and cause of sin, which we show better if we bring the matters themselves to the middle. For unbridled gluttony of the belly incites the fullness of flesh to the heat of lust, but lust once committed is often covered by perjury or homicide, lest it be punished by the vengeance of human laws.
Let us set before our eyes that someone loosened the reins of voracity for himself, by which voracity overcome he committed the crime of adultery: but caught in adultery, he secretly killed the adulterer's husband lest he be dragged to judgment. This adultery therefore, placed between voracity and homicide, arising from the former and generating the latter, is sin and punishment and cause of sin.
It is certainly sin through itself, but it is punishment of sin because it increased the fault of voracity. It is cause of sin because it also generated the subsequent homicide. The prophet Jeremiah says: I will visit upon you according to the fruit of your endeavors. As Jeremiah, chapter twenty-one, verse fourteen says. Sins committed by deliberation differ from other sins.
For the Lord pursues not so much evil deeds as the zeal for wickedness. In deeds one often sins through weakness, often through negligence, but in deliberate efforts one always sins through malicious intention. Blessed Job, designating the type of those sinning within the Church, says: He has cut me down with wound upon wound. As the book of Job, chapter sixteen, verse fourteen records.
In her weak members holy Church is cut down with wound upon wound when sin is added to sin, so that the fault is more vehemently heaped up. For whom avarice drags to plunder, plunder leads to deceit, so that the committed fault is even defended by falsehood; what is this person but cut down with wound upon wound?
Well is it said through the prophet: Cursing, lying, murder, theft, and adultery have overflowed, and blood has touched blood. As the prophet Hosea, chapter four, verse two says. Blood therefore touches blood when fault has heaped up fault. When wound is added to wound, the forces of the ancient enemy are more vehemently aroused against us.
Although we sin anywhere by thinking, speaking, and acting, yet the mind is carried away more wildly through these three when it is lifted up by the prosperity of this world.

Chapter 36: Manifest and Hidden Sins

Each person's hidden fault is like the womb of sin, which secretly conceives the sinner and hides his guilt in darkness. For one exits from the womb when the sinner is not ashamed to commit openly even those things he committed in secret. For it is written: Did I not perish immediately on leaving the womb? As the book of Job, chapter three, verse eleven says. That is, after I went out to open iniquity, why did I not at least then recognize myself as lost?
He would have perished in his own judgment if he had recognized himself as lost. They had come forth as if from the womb of their concealment, of whom the prophet said: They proclaimed their sin like Sodom, and did not hide it. As the prophet Isaiah, chapter three, verse nine records.

Chapter 37: Relapsing After Repentance

There are some who when they come to their senses contemplate the justice and uprightness of God, and tremble while praying and weeping; but after the hour of contemplation has passed, they return so boldly to iniquity as if placed behind his back they are scarcely seen by the light of his justice.
Whoever relapses into sins after tears sees the face of God in secret within themselves as if seeing bodily, because they flatter him with tears when they come into his presence, and detract by their conduct when they withdraw as if from his sight. They are to be struck all the more for their evils because they know the righteous judgments of God even in the secret of thought.
There are some who after a wasted life return to themselves, and with conscience accusing them, abandon perverse paths, change their works, contradict their former wickedness, flee earthly actions, pursue heavenly desires; but before they are solidified in these same holy desires, through torpor of mind they return to what they had begun to judge, and run back to the evils they had determined to flee.
If perchance a person begins to do some good, before he grows strong in it through length of time, he relapses into external things and perversely abandons what he seemed to have rightly begun. There are some who after perverse paths desire to pursue holy ways; but before good desires are strengthened in them, some prosperity of the present age seizes them, which entangles them in external things, and while it withdraws their mind from the warmth of intimate love, extinguishes it as if by cold, and kills whatever seemed to appear in them of the flower of virtues.
Great care must be taken lest anyone fall back into that which he rejoices to have cleansed by tears, lest while the lamented fault is committed again, the very laments are made light in the sight of the just Judge. It is written in the book of Ecclesiasticus: He who is baptized from a dead person, and touches him again, what does his washing profit? As Ecclesiasticus, chapter thirty-four, verse thirty says.
For he neglects to be clean after washing, whoever does not guard the innocence of life after tears; and therefore they are washed and are in no way clean, who do not cease to weep for things committed, but again commit things to be wept over. He is baptized from a dead person who is cleansed by tears from sin; but he touches the dead after baptism who repeats the fault after tears.

Chapter 38: The Habit of Sin

The sinner, when he is no longer ashamed of his iniquity, is strengthened in that same iniquity even by the supports of the worst habit. The sinner is fostered as if by certain delights so that he may grow, while the fault is strengthened by habits so that it may thrive.
When the fault begins to come forth into habit, it certainly feeds itself either with false hope of divine mercy or with the open misery of desperation, so that one in no way returns to correction, because either he imagines his maker as merciful to himself in a disordered way, or he fears in a disordered way what he has done.
Blessed Job, seeing the fall of the human race and considering into what precipices it is plunged in the pit of iniquity, says: Why did I not die in the womb? As the book of Job, chapter three, verse eleven says. That is, in the very hidden perpetration of sin, why did I not want to mortify myself from the life of the flesh? Why, he asks, was I received upon the knees? That is, even after open fault, why did habit still receive me in it, so as to make me stronger for wickedness, and fostered me by sustaining me in evil habits?
Often when the fault has come into habit, the mind resists it more weakly even if it desires to, because by as many times as it is bound by evil repetition, by so many bonds is it bound to the mind. Sometimes it happens that the weak mind, when it cannot free itself from the habit of sin, inclines itself to certain solaces of false consolation, so that it promises itself such mercy from the coming Judge that he will not utterly destroy even those whom he finds deserving of rebuke.
To this matter worse happens, that the tongue of many similar people consents to it, when many heap up the evil deeds of men with praises; whence it often happens that the fault grows incessantly nourished by favors. But the wound is neglected to be cured which seems worthy of the reward of praise.
Through Solomon in Proverbs it is said: My son, if sinners entice you, do not consent. As Proverbs, chapter one, verse ten says. For sinners entice when they either bring in evils to be committed with blandishments, or exalt committed ones with favors. The prophet Isaiah says: Woe to those who drag iniquity with cords of vanity. As Isaiah, chapter five, verse eighteen says.
For iniquity is dragged with cords of vanity while the fault is prolonged through the increase of habit. Blessed David says of the habit of sinning: The cords of sinners have encompassed me. As the Psalm, one hundred eighteen, verse sixty-one says. Because a cord is twisted by adding to make it grow, not undeservedly is the habit of sin figured in a cord, which in a perverse heart, while often repeated, is increased more abundantly through the growth of habit.

Chapter 39: Lesser Sins

Often sin is committed either by ignorance or by weakness, so that either a person does not know what he ought to will, or cannot do all that he has willed. When the mind dies in sin, it is more quickly brought back to life if careful thoughts live concerning this.

Chapter 40: Graver Sins

Every sin that is not quickly wiped away is either sin and cause of sin, or sin and punishment of sin. For sin that repentance does not wash away immediately drags one to another by its very weight. Whence it happens that it is not only sin, but sin and cause of sin. For from that vice the subsequent fault arises, from which the blind mind is led so as to be more wickedly bound by another.
Sin that arises from sin is no longer merely sin, but is sin and punishment of sin, because by just judgment almighty God clouds the heart of the sinner, so that by the merit of the preceding sin he falls also in other things. For whom he did not want to free, he struck by abandoning. Not undeservedly is it called punishment of sin, which is committed by just blindness imposed from above as vengeance for the preceding sin.
Which is done by disposition ordained from above, but confused by iniquity from below, so that both the preceding fault is cause of the subsequent; and again the subsequent fault is punishment of the preceding. Paul the apostle saw in the unfaithful and slippery as it were a certain seed of error, when he said: Who when they had known God, did not glorify him as God or give thanks, but became vain in their thoughts. As Paul writes in his letter to the Romans, chapter one, verse twenty-one.
Behold, this is sin and cause of sin, from which cause what follows he adds: And their foolish heart was darkened; for professing themselves to be wise, they became fools; and they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the likeness of the image of corruptible man, and of birds, and of fourfooted beasts, and of creeping things. As Romans, chapter one, verses twenty-two and twenty-three say. Behold, this is sin and punishment of sin.
But it would be only sin and punishment of sin, if yet another did not still follow from this sin. For after their unfaithfulness it is added: Wherefore God delivered them up to the desires of their heart, unto uncleanness, to dishonor their own bodies among themselves. As Romans, chapter one, verse twenty-four says.
Those who knowing God did not glorify him as God were led from that sin and cause of sin also to this, that they fell into the worship of serpents and birds. But because through this blindness also they fell all the way to uncleanness and bodily dishonor, the very blindness of their unfaithfulness is both sin and punishment of sin to the preceding understanding. But to the subsequent uncleanness it became sin and cause of sin.
Those who knowing God committed the sin of pride by understanding are also blinded lest they understand what they commit. And those who are unwilling to follow their understanding in sin and cause of sin lose the very light of understanding in sin and punishment of sin. By the merit of the former sin the pit of subsequent sins is covered, so that he who knowingly perpetrates evil may thereafter justly fall also unknowingly in other things.
For this is done, that faults may be struck by faults, so that the very increases of vices may become punishments of sinners. There are many sins that we commit, and therefore they do not seem grave to us, because loving ourselves with private love, with our eyes closed, we flatter ourselves in our own deception.
It often happens that we judge our own grave sins lightly, and the light evils of our neighbors gravely. For it is written: Men will be lovers of themselves. As Paul writes in his second letter to Timothy, chapter three, verse two. And we know that private love strongly closes the eye of the heart; from which it happens that what we do, we do not consider grave, is often done by a neighbor, and seems too detestable to us.
But why does what seemed trivial to us in ourselves seem grave in a neighbor, except that we neither see ourselves as neighbor nor neighbor as ourselves? If we looked at ourselves as neighbor, we would see our own blameworthy things strictly. And again, if we looked at neighbor as ourselves, his action would never appear intolerable to us, since we have often perhaps done such things, and thought we had done nothing intolerable to our neighbor.
Moses strove to correct the wrongly divided judgment of our mind through the precept of the law, when he said that the measure should be just and the sextarius equal. As the book of Leviticus, chapter nineteen, verse thirty-six says. But Solomon says this: Weight and weight, measure and measure, both are abominable to God. As Proverbs, chapter twenty, verse ten says.
We know that in the double weight of merchants one is greater, another is less. For they have one weight by which they weigh for themselves, another weight by which they weigh for their neighbor. For giving they prepare lighter weights, but for receiving heavier ones. Every man who weighs the things of his neighbor one way and his own things another way has weight and weight.
Both therefore are abominable to God, because if he loved his neighbor as himself, he would love him in us as himself. And if he looked at himself as neighbor, he would judge himself in evils as neighbor.

Chapter 41: The Desperation of Sinners

False hope sometimes does not cut off the mind, but a worse dispensation pierces it; which while it utterly destroys all hope of pardon, more abundantly nourishes the soul with the milk of error. Blessed Job, assuming in his speech the person of anyone who despairs, says: Why was I nursed at the breasts? As the book of Job, chapter three, verse twelve says.
As if to say: Would that at least after committing evils I had not wanted to flatter myself, lest I bind myself the more wickedly to the fault the more gently I foster myself in it. Whoever succumbs to impiety certainly abandons the life of justice by dying. But who is also buried after sin under the weight of desperation—what else is he but buried after death in the torment of hell?
In the books of Solomon it is written: The wicked man, when he has come into the depth of sins, despises. As Proverbs, chapter eighteen, verse three says. For he refuses to return, because he despairs that mercy can be shown to him. But when by despairing he sins more, he removes as it were the bottom from his well, lest he find a place where he can be held.
Everyone who abandoning the way of life casts himself down into the darkness of sins plunges himself as into a well or a pit; but if by long perpetration he is also oppressed by the habit of iniquity so that he can no longer rise to higher things, he is constricted as by the narrow mouth of the well.
The prophet David prays under the guise of sinners, saying: Let not the tempest of water drown me, nor let the deep swallow me up, nor let the well close its mouth upon me. As the Psalm, sixty-eight, verse sixteen says. For whom the iniquity of evil work has moved from good stability, the tempest of water has seized. But if habit has not yet prevailed, it has not drowned him.
He has already fallen into the well who has committed what divine law forbids. But if long habit does not yet weigh him down, the well has in no way narrowed its mouth. Therefore he exits more easily the less he is constricted by habit. It is like a certain narrowness of closed mouth to want to rise from oppressing evil habit and not be able; already indeed to tend to higher things by desire, but still to remain in the lowest by action; to go ahead in heart but not follow in work, and to suffer self-contradiction in himself.