Since it is customary for you to have the word, because if you did not believe in it completely, and if the things you are doing regarding us were not pleasing to God, you would already have been extinguished, I wanted to reveal to you the deeds of a few kings equal to you in apostasy and cruelty, so that your voice which says, 

"If the faith of Arius, which is mine, were not Catholic, if it were not pleasing to God that I persecute that faith which they wrote against us at Nicaea, I would never still be flourishing in the empire," might be silenced. I do not mention those kings who were alien to the knowledge of God; I only discuss those who are known to have reigned in Judea. In the Book of Judges, we find Jerubbaal, the son of Joash, chosen by God, and it was said to him: 

"Go in your strength, and you will save Israel from the hand of Midian: Is it not I who send you?"

And below: "I will be with you, and you will strike Midian as one man;" whom the scripture says had a multitude as numerous as the sand of the sea. But when all the things God promised to Gideon were fulfilled, when he saw himself exalted from humility, enriched from poverty, made king from a commoner, what does he immediately do? He says to the people: "Give me each one an earring from his spoils." When he had received the weight of the earrings, made of gold, one thousand seven hundred shekels, besides the bracelets and chains, and the garments, and the purple garments that were on the kings of Midian, and besides the golden chains that were on the necks of the camels of the adversaries, what does the sacred scripture say that Gideon did?

Gideon, who is also Jerubbaal, made an ephod and set it up in his city Ophrah: and the children of Israel prostituted themselves by worshiping it there, and it became a scandal to Gideon and his house. Did he perhaps delay for some days, and then performed this evil work against God? Could he perhaps remember, when he was about to do this, that God had said to him: "Go, I will be with you?" Where is that, that he demolished Baal according to God's command and cut down his groves, and offered a sacrifice to God?

Where is that which he said to God's messenger who said to him: "The Lord is with you, mighty in strength: In me, Lord, and if the Lord is with us, why then has all this happened to us? And where are all His miracles which our fathers told us about, saying: Now

Did God bring us out of Egypt? And now He has rejected us and handed us over to the hand of Midian.

Did He repeat what happened when they tried to go against God, which they suffered because of idolatry? But when they were rescued to live without fear of their enemies, from all those evils, He said He was overwhelmed with the entire people. Immediately, He does the thing by which He and the entire people were handed over to the hands of their enemies because of idolatry.

He had heard God, that because they served idols and abandoned God, all those evils happened to them. He remembered the prophet speaking. And yet that day, when their enemies did nothing against them, that king, in his madness, who you would liken to, decided it was better to serve idols than the God who had provided those things to him.

And the scripture says, the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and He handed them over to the hand of Midian for seven years. The hand of Midian prevailed greatly over Israel, and the Israelites made for themselves hiding places in the mountains, caves, and strongholds.

When Israel planted, the Midianites, Amalekites, and the children of the East would come up against them, camp against them, and destroy the produce of the land all the way to Gaza. They left no sustenance in Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor donkey. They came up with their livestock and their tents, and came as numerous as locusts, for they were without number, and they entered the land to destroy it.

Israel became very poor because of Midian, and the children of Israel cried out to the Lord. The Lord sent a prophet to the children of Israel, and he said to them: Thus says the Lord God of Israel: I am the one who brought you up from Egypt, and brought you out of the house of bondage, and delivered you from the hand of the king of Egypt, and from the hand of all who oppressed you. I drove them out from before you and gave you their land. And I said to you: I am the Lord your God; do not fear the gods of the Amorites, in whose land you dwell, but you have not obeyed my voice.

What did Jerubbaal, also called Gideon, do after this rebuke from the Lord? As soon as he saw his enemy reduced to nothing, as soon as all those adversaries, who were said to be as numerous as the sand of the sea, were slaughtered, and not by a large number of Israelites, but by three hundred men, as soon as he saw all the foreign kings killed, he made something by which the children of Israel could sin against God. Yet, he is found to have ruled in Israel for forty years even after committing such a great sin.

It will be remarkable, then, if you continue to live sacrilegiously in the body, when you see that Gideon, the king, lived for forty years after committing idolatry and obtained his kingdom.

Indeed, the Israelites rested for forty years, and no adversaries were allowed to attack them, nor did any foreign power dominate them, because they cried out to God, as the holy scripture says.

God did such good things for your fellow sacrilegious people, showing His omnipotence, but those who did not choose to serve Him even for one day after receiving rest from such great dangers were deemed unworthy of obtaining peace.

Even though the Israelites were like this, God spared them out of His pity, even when they committed idolatry afterward.

He did not punish them immediately but did so again at a time He deemed fit: the guilt of idolatry could not go unpunished.

Similarly, He will respond to you, Constantius, unless you take care of yourself in the meantime.

If the Israelites, who served demons and abandoned God, were heard and liberated from the hand of Midian and all their persecutors as soon as it dawned on their hearts that He is the all-powerful God who brought their ancestors out of the land of Egypt, what makes you think we Christians cannot be delivered from your hands?

Do you not see that we worship the same God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, apostles, and martyrs?

Believe me, we have been heard and will be heard so that you may fall under the feet of all His servants with all your fragile grandeur.

But even if there are some delays, so that He may grant His holy church full security and peace once you Arians are extinguished, it is because it is fitting for you, as an adversary, to be tested for the benefit of all.

You say: If I had done wrong, if I held heresy, God would have already punished me.

You hear the holy scripture speaking of how the Lord spared even foreigners for a long time, yet later they received the consequences of their actions.

Samuel said to Saul: The Lord sent me to anoint you as king over Israel, and now listen to the voice of the Lord's words:

This is what the Almighty Lord says: Now I will defend what Amalek did to you, Israel, how he opposed you on the way as you came up from Egypt.

And now go and strike Amalek and everything he has, and do not desire anything from them, but destroy him and anathematize him and all that he has, and do not spare him, but kill everything from man to woman, and from infant to nursing baby.

And later: Saul came to the city of Amalek, and he approached and besieged Amalek by the stream; and Saul said to the Kenite: Go, depart from the midst of Amalek, and do not join with him, for you showed mercy to the children of Israel when they came up from Egypt.

And the Kenite departed from the midst of Amalek: and Saul struck Amalek from Havilah to Shur, which is opposite Egypt, and Saul captured Agag, king of Amalek, alive, and killed all his people with the edge of the sword.

Do you see how, although it was late, they received the punishment for their crime?

And you ask: If I were not doing well, would I not have reigned for a long time?

We also find that Saul, against the Lord’s command, was rejected for his actions, yet he reigned for a long time after his rejection, after God said to Samuel: I regret that I have anointed Saul as king.

So you ask: 
 If I hadn't believed correctly, if I hadn't lived in a way that pleased God, would I never have ruled until now?

And to understand fully what we are saying about Saul, take note of what he did against the Lord's command.

Saul and all his people took Agag, the king, and the best of the flocks and 
 the cattle and the food and the vineyards, and all the good things, and they did not want to destroy all the good things, but they kept all the valuable items and destroyed the worthless ones. And the word of the Lord came to Samuel saying: I regret that I have made Saul king, because he has turned away from me and has not kept my words. And Samuel was grieved and cried out to God all night. Before dawn, Samuel went to meet Israel. And further on: 
 And Samuel came to Saul, and behold, Saul was offering a burnt offering to the Lord, and the first spoils he had taken from Amalek. And Samuel came to Saul, and Saul said to him: Blessed are you by the Lord, I have carried out everything the Lord has spoken. And Samuel said: What is this sound of the flock in my ears, and the sound of cattle that I hear? And Saul said: They were brought from Amalek. The people spared the best of the flocks and cattle to sacrifice to the Lord 
 your God, but the rest we destroyed and exterminated. And Samuel said to Saul: Were you not small in your own eyes, leader of the tribes of Israel, and did not the Lord anoint you king over Israel, and send you on a mission, and say to you: Go and destroy those sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against them until you have consumed them? Why then did you not obey the voice of the Lord, but rushed upon the spoil, and did what was evil in the sight of the Lord? And Saul said: I did listen to the people, I went on the mission the Lord sent me on, and brought back Agag, the king of Amalek, and I have destroyed the Amalekites; but the people took some of the spoil, the best of the sheep and cattle of what should have been destroyed, to sacrifice 
 before the Lord our God in Gilgal. And Samuel said: Does the Lord delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices as much as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Surely, obedience is better than sacrifice, and listening better than the fat of rams; because rebellion is like the sin of divination, and arrogance like the evil of idolatry. Because you have rejected the word of the Lord, he has rejected you as king. And Saul said to Samuel: I have sinned because I transgressed the word of the Lord and your words, because I feared the people and obeyed their voice; now please forgive my sin. Return with me, that I may worship the Lord your God. And Samuel said to him: The Lord has torn the kingdom of Israel from you today, and given it to one of your neighbors, better than you. And further on: 
 And Samuel never again saw Saul until the day of his death, because Samuel mourned for Saul, and the Lord regretted that he had made Saul king over Israel. 
 And the Lord said to Samuel: How long will you mourn for Saul, since I have rejected him as king over Israel?

Are you in Saul's place? Behold, I am expelling him so that he does not reign over Israel. Fill your horn with oil and come; I am sending you to Jesse in Bethlehem, for I have seen among Jesse's sons a king for myself.

Now you can understand, Constantius, that even if rejected by the Lord and destined for eternal death, one can still reign for a long time after a grave sin has been committed. For you see, after the glorious son of Jesse, David, was anointed king, Saul still reigned for a long time and even had the power to persecute him whom God had chosen as prophet and king. The evil persecuted the good, the unjust persecuted the just, the one hated by God persecuted the one loved by God.

Since this is so, do not boast because you are still living after committing such a crime, just like Saul lived. But consider the kind of vengeance that befell Saul, which could also happen to you, unless you take care of yourself.

For if the Lord was so indignant with him, first for taking the spoils against the command, and second for persecuting his man David, how much more necessary is it for his indignation to extend to you, whose crimes are so great that you even came into the guilt of sacrilege?

If, as you say, Lucifer, you had done evil and become a heretic, God would have already taken the kingdom from you. Consider also that Solomon lived after committing idolatry, and be willing to understand that you are also like him after he committed idolatry.

And the Lord raised an adversary to Solomon: Hadad the Edomite and Esrom the son of Anadeth in Ramoth, Adragas the king of Saba, his lord, and men gathered against him: and he was the chief of the congregation: and he took Damascus city, and sat in it, and reigned in Damascus, and they were adversaries to Solomon and Israel all the days of Solomon.

We have proven to you that Solomon also reigned for several years after committing idolatry, and indeed already not serving God but the devil, noted to have clung to worldly and diabolic men; so you too cling to your sacrilegious Arians. Even though you are still in the body and remain in the kingdom, you are found to be like Solomon after he deserted God and followed idols.

You wanted us to adhere to such people as Solomon made the Israelites adhere. Where was that love of God, which according to the holy scriptures was with Solomon, at the time when he deigned to follow idols and abandon God? Where did this come from, except because he had entirely become a man without sober understanding?

I do not want you to flatter yourself because, although you are a blasphemer and destroyer of God’s religion, you still have the kingdom and are arrogant after your sacrilege, just as we find Rehoboam, Solomon’s son, who committed idolatry, lived in the kingdom for twenty years. For the holy scripture says about him:

Said Nobilius at this point. Theodoret also used these, except for Lucifer, who differed slightly from the Greek; where instead of twenty years, it is "twelve years."

King Solomon slept with his fathers in the city of David; and his son Rehoboam reigned in his place in Jerusalem. He was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty years in Jerusalem.

And he did evil before the Lord, and did not walk in the way of David his father.

Therefore, since both Solomon, who gave himself to idols, and his son Rehoboam, who always served idols, did not walk in David's ways, yet they lived in the kingdom and both reigned until their last day, how can you wonder about yourself? Why, after committing a sin and persisting in that crime, neither the kingdom nor life is taken from you by God? When you see Jeroboam trying to completely overturn the religion of the Lord as you have, and yet he survived for many years, and indeed remained in that crime as it is written:

There was a man from Mount Ephraim, a servant of Solomon, and his name was Jeroboam, and his mother’s name was Sariram, a woman of ill repute. And elsewhere:

And when all Israel heard that Jeroboam had returned from Egypt, they sent and called him to the assembly, and made him king over Israel.

And below:

And Jeroboam said in his heart: Now the kingdom will return to David, if this people goes up to offer sacrifices in the house of the Lord in Jerusalem; the heart of the people will turn to their lord, Rehoboam king of Judah. Then Jeroboam thought, and went. And he made two golden calves: and he said to the people: It is enough for you to go up to Jerusalem: Behold your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt. And he placed one in Bethel, and the other he put in Dan; and this thing became a sin, and the people went as far as Dan to one of the calves.

They made high places, and he made priests from among the people who were not of the sons of Levi. And Jeroboam made a feast in the eighth month on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast in Judah; and he went up to the altar that he had made in Bethel, to sacrifice to the calves that he had made, and he appointed in Bethel priests of the high places that he had made; and he went up to the altar that he had made on the fifteenth day in the eighth month, in the month that he had devised in his own heart; and he made a feast for the children of Israel.

Therefore, I do not want you to boast that while you practice idolatry, you still live enjoying the glory of the kingdom. When you see that Jeroboam made golden calves and turned the people of Israel to idolatry, yet he was not immediately destroyed when he sinned, but was allowed to live for a long time. You understand what this means; however, I wanted to.

Please consider the words.

Let's analyze this speech; for there is much in these words.

For example, when someone has been practicing idolatry for 35 years, and immediately, I say, 
    do not boast about this, for what is the reason you are doing these things? I remain silent, 
    he has thrown, plundered, spared, they will ring, a thousand other things, which it is full of. 

La Cerda
. Therefore, you should glory that although you are practicing 
    idolatry, you still live possessing the glory of the kingdom.

When you see this Jeroboam who made golden calves, turned the people of Israel to idolatry, and yet 
    not only was he not immediately extinguished when he sinned, but he was also allowed to live for a long time. 
    Could God not have removed those idolatrous kings?

But it has been shown how ungrateful you are to God who, although you are exalted so much, still forget Him who 
    exalts you, not only forget Him 

you are unmindful of Him, and His commandments: and afterward, you pursue the same

, 
    but you still persecute Him in His servants, wishing to remove His religion from the midst. Recognize that this is so 
    from the deed of this king Jeroboam, who, although he was the son of a servant, although he remembered himself to 
    have been born of a harlot, although he received the kingdom of his lord Solomon to the disgrace of the same Solomon, 
    why, sinning 

Abandoning. Sinning against God is better, as below, against those sinning against Him

against God, did he turn himself to idols, when, I say, he knew that the kingdom was given to him by God because Solomon 
    his lord had followed idols, yet he considered all these things as nothing and thought to make idols, and with all the 
    people who served God, to be devoted to them rather than to the living God, who had made him, the son of a harlot, 
    have the kingdom of Solomon his lord. Therefore, do not wonder that he spares you ungrateful ones sinning against Him: 
    but I urge you to see that although late, if you remain in this wickedness of yours, you will receive what all your 
    predecessors in sacrilege have received.

We urge you to deem it worthy to save yourself from such great evils: and 

We urge you to save yourself from such great evils, especially since you are not the first to commit these crimes, but examples are set before you, from which you should especially beware: you have this besides, that you are not the first to do these things

. You have moreover, you are not the first to do these things. We also see that this Jeroboam considered the warning 
    of the Lord as nothing: And it happened, he says, 

at that time, and Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, and found Ahijah the Shilonite the prophet on the way, and Ahijah was 
    wearing a new garment, and both were in the field.

And Ahijah took his new garment that he had on, and tore it into twelve pieces; and he said to Jeroboam: Take ten pieces 
    for yourself, for thus says the Lord God of Israel: Behold, I will tear the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will 
    give you ten tribes: and he will have two tribes for the sake of my servant David, and for the sake of Jerusalem the city 
    which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, for which Solomon has abandoned me, and has made Astarte the idol of 
    the Sidonians, and Chemosh the idol of Moab, and the king of the children of Ammon, and has not walked in my ways to do 
    what is right before me, as David his father did: and I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand in the days of his 
    life for the sake of my servant David, whom I have chosen, because he has kept my commandments and my statutes. But I will 
    take the kingdom out of the hand of his son, and will give you ten tribes; and to his son I will give two tribes, that my 
    servant David may always have a lamp before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen for myself, to put 

I will put

my name there: and I will take you and you shall reign over all that your soul desires, and you shall be king over Israel.

Your soul desires it, and you will be king in Israel. And it will happen if you keep everything I command you, and you walk in my ways, and do what is right in my sight, and keep my commandments and my statutes, as David my servant did. I will be with you, and I will build you a faithful house, as I built for David.

When a man, who was born from a prostitute and remembered he was from a servile line, heard these things from God, did he not, after all that the Lord promised was fulfilled, obey the one who promised him so much? And did he not, as soon as he saw himself exalted, immediately act against Him? Was not God abandoned by all His worshipers as soon as Jeroboam's works were given?

We tell you that unless you correct yourself and begin to walk in ways pleasing to God, you will perish as an example; and you, remaining in your iniquity, persist in your sacrilege. It is not new for this king Jeroboam, and God, through His man, made these things be carried out. When his son was detained by a severe illness, he sent to the man of God and heard the future. Yet, even when he saw the promised evils being fulfilled, he acted more and more against God, wanting to destroy God's house.

There was a frail man, and his name was Achiabeth; he was sixty years old, and the word of the Lord was with him.

Jeroboam said to his wife, "Arise and take in your hand to the man of God bread and cakes for his children, and grapes and a jar of honey." And the woman arose and did as her husband told her.

Achiab, who was very old and his eyes were dim to see, and the woman arose from Baria and went. And it happened when she entered the city to Achiab the Shilonite, Achiab said to his servant, "Go now to meet Anna, the wife of Jeroboam, and say to her: Enter and do not stand still, for thus says the Lord: Hard things I send upon you." And Anna entered to the man of God; and Achiab said to her, "Why have you brought me bread and grapes and cakes and a jar of honey? Thus says the Lord: Behold, you will go from me, and behold, when you enter the gate of the city Arira, your maidens will come out to meet you."

They will tell you: The boy is dead.

For this is what the Lord says: Behold, I will destroy Jeroboam who urinates against the wall. Those who die of Jeroboam in the city, dogs will eat, and those who die in the field, birds of the sky will eat.

It is not, I say, a new thing, if you persist in this stubbornness. When you know that this Jeroboam was not deterred by all these things, as soon as it was spoken by the man of God, when the woman entered the city, their son died. Yet Jeroboam did not see what God would do to him because he had forsaken Him and made the people perish with him. He would have represented it, nor did he fear from the death of his son that other things might follow him. But he grew old in his deceit; so much indeed was Jeroboam out of his mind since he had departed from Him, who had given him the kingdom.

When he said: Go to the man of God and find out if our son will die, he learned through the man of God that not only their son would die, but also that dangers were threatening his entire kingdom. Yet he, as he had once decided, preferred to serve the devil. He sends to the man of God to inquire about the future, and he despises the one to whom he sends the man. In contempt of his majesty, he makes calves and made the people worship them with him. He did these things, and yet he was not immediately destroyed but remained in the kingdom for a long time.

And you say:

If I were a heretic, if, as they say, I attacked God's religion, would I have been punished by now? See further what happened to this king Jeroboam, and yet how he did not turn to God even then but died in his crime, persisting in his sacrilege. 
 And Jeroboam made a feast in the eighth month on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast in Judah. He went up to the altar he had made in Bethel to sacrifice to the calves he had made, and he appointed priests for the high places he had made. He went up to the altar he had made on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, in the month he had devised in his own heart. He made a feast for the children of Israel and went up to the altar to offer sacrifices.

And behold, a man of God came from Judah by the word of the Lord to Bethel. 
 Jeroboam stood by his altar to burn incense, and the prophet called out to the altar by the word of the Lord, saying: O altar, altar, this is what the Lord says: Behold, a son shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name, and he shall sacrifice on you the priests of the high places who burn incense on you, and human bones shall be burned on you. He gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which the Lord has spoken: Behold, the altar shall be torn down, and the ashes that are on it shall be poured out.

And it came to pass, when the king heard the saying of the man of God, who had cried out against the altar in Bethel, that he stretched out his hand from the altar, saying, Seize him. And his hand, which he stretched out against him, dried up so that he could not pull it back to himself. The altar also was torn down, and the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the Lord.

And the king answered and said to the man of God, Pray for the favor of the Lord your God, that my hand may be restored to me. And the man of God sought the favor of the Lord, and the king's hand was restored to him.

And God, and it happened just as before. Fulfilled when he saw these wonders, which were spoken by the mouth of man by God's command, and the wicked arm stretched out to kill the man of God suddenly became withered out of fear, and immediately also by the prayer of God's servant became healed. Did he destroy the idolatry he established? Did he finally remove the festival day he invented from his heart? Not at all; but in the stubbornness of his presumption, he found the day of his death.

Therefore, we should not be surprised if God turns away from you. In your heresy, you consider accepting the day of death, when even your previous sacrilegious ones could not be turned back to worship only God despite signs and wonders. For the Holy Scripture says about Jeroboam: "And after this, Jeroboam did not turn away from his evil, but turned back and made some of the people priests of high places. Whoever wanted, he raised his hand and became a priest in the high places." And this word became a sin in the house of Jeroboam, leading to its destruction and extermination from the face of the earth.

Lest these things be said of you, I beg you to save yourself from the vile assembly of the Arians. I beg you to be a Christian as you were before from being an Arian, and do not be angry with us for comparing your actions with those of Jeroboam. But rather I implore you to see all these instructions as intended for your well-being rather than rebukes.

You are compared by us to Jeroboam in our times because you have tried to turn everyone away from God, just as he tried to make the people of Israel apostates from worshipping God. I do not want you to promise yourself any hope from this—that you are doing wrong, and yet you reign. Since you see Jeroboam also ruled for a long time in his wickedness, and Solomon's son, likewise an idolater, died in the same wickedness. And his son Abijah, about whom it is written: "He walked in the sins of his father, which he did before him, and his heart was not fully devoted to the Lord his God, as the heart of David his father was." Yet while they served idols, they were in the kingdom and died in that dignity, and passed the authority of the kingdom to their sons.

Therefore, do not boast in this, that your father passed the kingdom to you, saying: "Unless my father had done well by joining the Arians, we would not be reigning." Do not say: "If I were a heretic, I would never be ruling so much, God would never allow me to remain in the kingdom," when you see Baasha, son of Ahijah, reigned over Israel for twenty-four years, of whom it is written in the third book of Kings: "He did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of Jeroboam son of Nebat, and in his sins, just as he caused Israel to sin."

King Baasha should have feared lest he be struck down like Jeroboam if he had turned away from the ways of the Lord. But you are like those who turn away from God, that when it pleases you to take on the office of idolatry to the injury of God, you cannot be frightened even by those who have already been judged.

It is certain; you could neither be frightened by the example nor turned to God by example.

Turn to God. It is also written about Zambri, the king: 
 And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and did worse than all who were before him. He followed all the ways of Jeroboam, son of Nebat, in his sins. Yet, he who is said to have sinned more than all the kings who were before him was not immediately destroyed when he abandoned God, nor was he afflicted by any severe illness, so that he would be seen as more severely punished, who is described as having sinned more gravely. 

You see, Constantius, even if you live in the height of happiness in this temporary life, you should still fear more, because you are reserved for God's judgment. Even if those who are immediately destroyed, to whom some divine punishment is inflicted, are always tormented after their descent, still if you are taken from here living in the height of happiness, consider how vengeance is going to proceed upon you, who will be found in such great crime. Therefore, do not ascribe any happiness to yourself here, because you are denying the only Son of God, because you are persecuting His family. Yet, still, your spirit remains in that murdering body.

Consider even the son of Baasha, for thirty-five years, who was sacrilegious like you, reigned among the Jews. About whom it was written: He went in the ways of Asa, his father, 
 and did not turn aside from them, to do what was right in the sight of the Lord, but they did not abstain from the high places, and they sacrificed and burned incense in the high places. Behold, even here a king is described as having died in peace. So, though he practiced idolatry for thirty-five years, do not ascribe glory to yourself and say: 
 Therefore, I am not wounded by any plague, therefore I am not yet destroyed, but I still live possessing the kingdom of the Roman Empire, because I have good belief, because Arius's faith is correct, because I have done well to remove bishops, and have established others as Arius desired. 

Do not, I say, glory in this, that while doing these things, you still boast, when you see this king held the kingdom for thirty-five years, and was taken away in peace. 
 If they could escape the crime of idolatry unpunished, it could also be the same for you, Constantius.

Therefore, turn to the Lord, lest you be found as Ahab was found, about whom it is written: And Ahab did evil in the sight of the Lord, 
 and did worse than all who were before him. It was not enough for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam, son of Nebat, but he also took a wife, Jezebel, daughter of Ethbaal, king of the Sidonians. He went and served Baal, and worshipped him. He set up an altar for Baal in the house of his gods, which he built in Samaria; and Ahab made a grove to provoke God further.

To provoke God and destroy his soul: and he did evil above all the kings of Israel who were before him. Do not let yourself stay with the Arians any longer, but come over to us Christians, for whom all heresies are like Baal. Just as heretics were to the worshippers of God in those times, you are now to us because of this heresy of yours. Believe me, through this heresy, you are to us as Ahab was in his time.

Do not think that God hasn't immediately punished you, when you see how Ahab and his wife Jezebel, who even killed the prophets of the Lord, were involved in such wickedness that they did not allow any man confessing God to remain in the land of Israel, and yet they were spared for a long time. Do not take pride in your wickedness; but consider this, I beg you, that unless you repent, just as their deeds were eventually repaid, so will yours be.

Do not say: 
 I have been in power for a long time, I am strong, I hold true faith, I am right in persecuting those who believe differently, as described in the faith of Nicaea; do not say this, but consider what you are doing, for despite your many crimes, either listen to us, God's priests, and convert to God, or at least understand that you will receive the due punishment for your actions when you can no longer claim ignorance.

Take heed from the example of Ahab, the slayer of the Lord’s prophets and worshipper of all demons, who was preserved in the kingdom for a long time despite his many crimes, so that he might eventually repent. He was not only spared the punishment for his evil deeds but also helped in his distress, so that he might realize that he was not avenged by Baal and other demons, which the pagans call gods, but by the God of Israel, whose prophet spoke to him and declared how God would reduce the enemies of Israel to nothing.

For the son of 
Ben-Hadad
, king of Samaria, besieged the city with thirty-two other kings, boasting that he would defeat all of Israel as if they were nothing. But God defeated this foreign king before Israel. To which king did God give victory? To Ahab, who had abandoned Him, who made Israel serve Baal and all demons, because He helped him so that he might believe that this God alone, whose people are Israel, and not another, had given him victory, so that Ahab might see the justice of correcting his errors, as soon as the enemy began to build a siege against the city of the Israelites.

And behold, the holy scriptures say, 
 a prophet came to the king of Israel and said, "Thus says the Lord. Have you heard this great sound? Behold, today I will deliver him into your hands, and you shall know that I am the Lord." And the king said, "By whom?" And the prophet said, "By the servants of the governors of the regions." And the king said, "Who will begin the battle?" And the prophet said, "You." And later: 
 And the servants of the governors of the regions went out of the city, and the army followed them, and each struck down his opponent, and the Syrians fled, and Israel pursued them.

If I had not served God well, if I had not believed correctly, would I ever have seen the Roman Empire placed under my control, or lived so long in the kingdom?

When you see King Ahab of Israel living like the Gentiles, and turning the people of God away from Him, just as you do, it was said to him, in whom he sinned, whose commands he disregarded: I will hand him over to you, so that you will know that I am God.

Just as He rescued him from Ben-Hadad, the king of Syria, so also He has rescued and continues to rescue you from all who wish to harm you, so that you can recognize that He is the God of the patriarchs and martyrs, and so that you can understand that the victory given to you was not because of the merits of your faith and life, since you are like King Ahab in every way, but that mercy was shown to you against your merits by Him whom you abandoned, just as it was shown to Ahab.

For if you say that you defeat your enemies because you have strong faith, Ahab, an idol worshiper and killer of holy prophets, could have said the same. You were preserved to correct your errors; do you not see?

Immediately after you took over Italy, you tried to overturn its church; you said that God the Father is not truly God the Father, denying His only Son, affirming that He is not truly the Son.

You asserted also that the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, was created out of nothing, and tried to defend that He descended from nothing, that the only Son of God existed when He did not.

You exerted all your efforts to remove the apostolic and evangelical tradition, making bishops ordained by God's judgment be removed by your authority, and placed heretics in their positions to preach your heresy.

You fought with military force against the church in Alexandria, exiled many bishops, sent them to mines, threw them in prison, and even killed a certain number of all worshipers of God.

While doing these things, you still say: If I were not doing well and believing correctly, God would never still allow me to reign? As if God was patient with Ahab and your fellow idolaters because they held the right path.

You think that because God is patient with your sins out of His unending mercy, just as He was with King Ahab, you are not sinning.

But because of your deeds, you are spared: you imitate Ahab in this as well, in that you love those who advise you badly, but destroy those who tell you the truth for the sake of your salvation.

Just as the four hundred false prophets told Ahab that he would achieve all things happily, contrary to what the prophet Micaiah of God said, which was that all bad things would follow him, and he loved the false prophets more than the true prophet of the Lord.

Similarly, you love your fellow Arians and obey their words, but you curse all of us priests of the Lord: first, for confessing that the Son of God is truly the Son of God; second, for not flattering you, for asserting that you are in danger, and for saying that unless you turn to God, you are going to eternal punishment.

And to help you believe that people of God have always been hated by apostate people, while enemies of God's religion, that is, worshipers of the devil, have been loved, consider whom Ahab loved and whom he hated.

And King Jehoshaphat of Judah said to the king of Israel: "Please inquire today of the Lord."

So the king of Israel called together all the prophets, about four hundred men, and asked them: "Should I go to war against Ramoth Gilead, or should I refrain?"

They answered: "Go up."

And later: Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel: "Is there no longer a prophet of the Lord here whom we can inquire of?"

The king of Israel answered Jehoshaphat: "There is still one prophet through whom we can inquire of the Lord, but I hate him because he never prophesies anything good about me, but always bad."

After the prophet Micaiah had said to him not to go up, because if he went up, he would not return: the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, king of Judah: "Didn't I tell you that he never prophesies anything good about me, only bad?"

What seemed bad to the one whom the devil had already possessed were the things said by the servant of God, and those things were judged good which were said by the servants of the devil.

It is not surprising, therefore, that Ahab listened to those whom the devil made his servants and would not listen to those whom God manifested as his servants through their endurance of suffering and their constancy in affirmation: the false prophets were enriched and honored, and dismissed by the king, whereas the prophet Micaiah of the Lord was thrown into prison and it was said: "Let him eat the bread of affliction until I return."

Yet, according to the word of the servant of God, he did not return.

You act the same way, Constantius; you love those who lead you to eternal death, who bring your soul to complete ruin; you deem it worthy to hate those who wish you to become a friend of God.

Do not boast that despite doing so much, you still possess this fragile life in the glory of the kingdom; for the sacred scriptures narrate that Jeroboam, the son of Joash, reigned in Israel for forty-one years in Samaria, even while abandoning God and serving idols, not departing from the wickedness of Ahab, king of Israel, and the sacrifices of Jeroboam.

You might argue that if you had done wrong, God would have already removed you from the kingdom: as if the son of Amaziah, because he did not depart from vanities, was struck with leprosy, yet still reigned for fifty-two years in Jerusalem.

But you are more powerful than King Uzziah because you do not suffer from leprosy.

Have that which can consume all your limbs, but that which can thoroughly taint your soul.

Grieve with us and shed tears for yourself; see how it stains the body, like leprosy, how it consumes the limbs with its poison.

Understand that just as the Arian heresy taints your inner self, so it affects your inner man just as leprosy affects those you see with leprosy.

Do not say: If I were not doing well, I would never have ruled for such a long time, I would never have been allowed to live until now.

When you see Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, who became king at sixteen years old and reigned for fifty-seven years, and when you hear what is written about him, you will surely find yourself imitating him.

And you will not start to wonder why, even though you are doing evil, you are still spared, seeing Manasseh, whose cruelty and sacrilege you are not less than, that he held the kingdom for fifty-seven years.

And the scripture says, Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David, and his son Manasseh reigned in his place.

Manasseh was sixteen years old when he became king, and he reigned for fifty-seven years in Jerusalem, and his mother's name was Hephzibah.

He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to the abominations of the nations that the Lord drove out before the children of Israel.

He rebuilt the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed, and built an altar for Baal, and made a grove as Ahab king of Israel had done, and worshiped all the host of heaven, and served them.

He built altars in the two courts of the house of the Lord, and made his sons pass through the fire, and practiced augury, and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards, doing much evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke Him to anger.

He made a carved image of the grove that he had made in the house of which the Lord had said to David and to Solomon his son, "In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever, and I will not make the feet of Israel wander anymore out of the land which I gave their fathers, if they will only be careful to do according to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them."

But they did not listen.