Because Manasseh deeply despised and led them astray to do more evil than the nations the Lord had destroyed before the Israelites, the Lord spoke through his servants the prophets, saying that Manasseh king of Judah had done these abominations and had done more wickedly than the Amorites who were before him, and had made Judah sin with his idols.

Therefore, the Lord God of Israel said, “Behold, I am bringing such disaster upon Jerusalem and Judah that the ears of everyone who hears of it will tingle.

And I will stretch over Jerusalem the measuring line of Samaria and the plumb line of the house of Ahab, and I will wipe Jerusalem clean as one wipes a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down.

And I will forsake the remnant of my inheritance and give them into the hand of their enemies, and they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies.

All their enemies, because they were cast away from me, and they were behind me.

They aggravated me from the day their fathers left the land of Egypt until this day.

The rest of the words of Manasseh, and everything he did, how he led Israel to sin, aren't these written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

He shed much innocent blood until he filled Jerusalem mouth to mouth, besides the sin which he made Judah commit, doing what is evil in the sight of the Lord God.

Manasseh slept with his fathers, and his son reigned in his place, being twenty-two years old.

Amos, what do you say, Constantius, to these things?

I believe you stop saying: If I were not acting well, I would not have reigned for so long; when you see yourself as another Manasseh, doing such things for fifty-seven years.

Because we said you are another Manasseh, observe that you have all his deeds.

He established idolatry in the house of God; you did the same in the temple and the houses of the Lord.

He made idols to be worshipped, usurped what was said to belong to the Lord, so that he could be called an idolater; you did all these things too, because you introduced the Arian heresy into the church.

You established your blasphemy as the Catholic faith to be received, but commanded that the one written at Nicaea, which we know to be apostolic and evangelical, be rejected.

As you now desired these things to happen, so Manasseh commanded all idols to be served, but to depart from God.

Therefore, it will not be surprising if you claimed the houses, in which we used to gather the people of God, and you called yourself a Catholic idolater, when you see that Manasseh did this, which you now have done.

So finally, the Lord will spare you holding the way of Manasseh, as He has spared him.

How long He spared him, so it was written that he slept with his fathers, and was buried in Jerusalem, and his son took over the kingdom in his place.

Do you read that he perished in war or was burdened by some illness? Not at all.

But what do you feel, I believe, with your wisdom, you say that all things happened to Manasseh without consequence.

You are such that you think this of Manasseh; because he reigned for fifty-seven years and handed over the kingdom to his son, and he died in peace, it may seem that all his great misdeeds went unpunished.

Do not pity yourself to turn to God, do not correct your wicked deeds, and you will find yourself tormented with Manasseh, whom you seem to surpass.

Because he only shed the blood of the righteous within the limits of Jerusalem, but you have shed and continue to shed it throughout the Roman kingdom.

But, you say, he burned or consecrated his children before the idols of his gods: and if you had children, you would undoubtedly have made them accept the Arian blasphemy.

Do you not know that just as those who burned their children pleased the devil then, because they had one mind to forsake the Creator and serve the creature, so now the devil demands nothing from you except that you deny the only Son of God?

This is his most acceptable sacrifice, that you believe just as Arius believed: this is greater to him in our times, that you deny the Son of God.

In honor of all demons, you wish to be burned by fire.

For he sees the worship of idols despised by everyone, because it was a futile invention. Now, he desires to deceive us, the servants of God, through you, his heretical servants. How, you ask, does he deceive? Just as he has already deceived you, he wants to deceive us. Since you are an Arian, you pretend to be a Christian until you can wound Christians with the poison of your heresy, so that they can no longer be true Christians, as we are, but become Arians as you are. This is the trickery of your duties which you perform for demons. For who, except the devil and his children, can say about the only Son of God, "
He
 is the Son, but not the true Son; 
He
 is God, but not the true God?"

Therefore, when you say, "I am a Christian, but I do not believe that the true God has a Son; I do not believe in the unified power of the Father and the Son; I believe the Son is a creature, made from nothing; I believe there was a time when 
He
 did not exist," you are sacrificing more to the devil than Manasseh did when he consecrated his sons through fire to all demons or burned them.

I grieve for you, Emperor, that you are so foolish and commit such great evils, yet you dare to say, "If I were not doing good, I would not still be reigning; God would have extinguished me by now." Do you not see that Manasseh, in his sacrilege and unbelief, is to be compared to you, for he reigned in Judea for fifty-seven years, as I have often said? This Manasseh made the people of the Lord sin and serve idols; he placed idols in the temple of the Lord and in the house of God, making the house of God, His sanctuary, an idol's shrine. Similarly, God endures you and tolerates you until He tests His family, crowns the worthy, and punishes the unworthy with eternal punishment along with you unless you correct yourself.

But believe that He can extinguish both Manasseh and now you in a single moment, in the blink of an eye. He spares you, not because He cannot, but because it is fitting to crown His worshipers who remain steadfast against your cruelty and to condemn you, His enemies, to eternal punishment if you continue as you are.

When you say, "If I were not doing right, I would not still be ruling," it is because those who mislead you not only refuse to correct you but also push you towards destruction. This is no surprise; it is written, both you and they will be like this: "The sinner is praised for the desires of his soul, and he who does evil is blessed; the sinner provokes the Lord according to his many angers, he does not seek Him: God is not in his sight; his ways are defiled at all times; his judgments are removed from his sight."

So when you say, "We do well to remove those bishops who confess to hold the faith written and established at Nicaea and to appoint those who confess as Arius did," and they, the Catholic bishops, say, "You are indeed that sinner who is unjustly praised for the desires of your soul: and you are the wicked one, who, being abandoned by God for your blasphemies, are not reproached for your sins by your flatterers, but rather are told that you are acting well."

Duck; and they rightly say: Who can you be compared to, except to the one marked by the Holy Spirit through the psalmist?

For when he commits wicked deeds, when he is very evil and detestable, yet he desires to be praised?

You say: Unless I did good, God would not have spared me until now.

And I find it said to God: Therefore, those who have strayed, you correct them, and you admonish and address those who sin, so that, abandoning wickedness, they would believe in you, Lord.

And those ancient inhabitants of your land, hating them because they did hateful works through medicines and unjust sacraments, and the merciless killers of children, you wanted to destroy through the hands of our parents, so that they might receive a worthy journey of the children of God, which is the dearest land to you.

But you also had mercy on them as if they were humans, and you sent ahead an army of wasps to exterminate them in parts.

Were you unable to fight, to subjugate the wicked to the just, or to destroy them all at once with wild beasts or a harsh word?

But judging them in parts, you gave a place for repentance, knowing well that their nation was wicked and their natural evil, and that their thoughts could not be changed forever.

For their seed was cursed from the beginning, nor fearing any pardon for their sins.

For who will say to you: What have you done? Or who will stand against your judgment?

Likewise, you are spared, Constantine, so that you may repent, or perish by the example of those who were known by God, that they would not act in repentance, that they would not turn to God.

Therefore, because they were wicked from the beginning, yet he spared them, and did not immediately punish them when they sinned.

So do not say: If I did not do well, God would never have spared me.

When you see that the wicked were long given a place for repentance so that they might finally see the causes of their evil deeds, and make amends to God for their sin.

Therefore, if you do not turn to God, you will be one of that cursed race, about which it is said to God: Knowing well that their nation is wicked, and their natural evil, and that their thoughts could not be changed forever.

For their seed was cursed from the beginning.

How then will you...

You will see how dreadful it is when you start being with such people, when you find yourself judged among them, when you are found among them and sent into unquenchable flames. You, therefore, will be the first and greatest in those punishments: for no one in evil deeds could be compared to you, except for the devil himself, so that someone in those punishments might be seen as better than you. You dare to say: 
 If I were not living well, if my works were not righteous, if my faith, that is Arian, had not been Catholic, if I had not rightly acted in removing those bishops who preach the faith described by the three hundred at Nicaea and more. I would never have reigned for long, I would never have shone so much in the kingdom, even if for a short time, let alone would I have ruled within the Roman boundary.

If it is as you say, why does the most righteous servant of God, Job, say to those who were attacking his righteousness with false accusations: 
 Listen to my words... and my flesh is held with pains: Why... their homes are abundant, and fear is nowhere... their cows conceive and do not miscarry, and their offspring are saved and give birth... like their old sheep; and their children play in joy: they hold the harp and lyre, and rejoice at the sound of the organ, and they ended their life in wealth... but they say to the Lord: depart from us, we do not want to know your ways... indeed... but pains will hold them from anger. And they will be like chaff in the wind, and like dust carried away by a storm... let their eyes see their own death. to me, because the pains of my wounds compel me to speak: Why do the wicked live, and their homes are not destroyed, and fear is far from them? Their cow never miscarried, she always carried her calf; they remain forever like sheep, and their children, having received the organ, 
 play with delight, so they live their lives in happiness, while the Lord says; Depart from me, you wicked, I do not want to know your ways: because the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished, and they will mourn with groaning in their life: they will be like chaff carried by the wind, or like dust, carried by a storm; let their eyes see their own death.

Since I know the Lord has said these things about them, know that none of you can silence me. Why does the most glorious Job say these things? Except because he knew that indeed many do evil, and yet certain.

They shall be preserved for the purpose that they either correct themselves or certainly feel the penalties of their sins after death, 
 feel what it was like not to seek the Lord, not to serve Him while they had the opportunity, by believing in Him alone and serving Him to gain His favor.

Now believe the testimony of such a great man, 
 stop saying that you acted justly by removing the Lord’s priests and appointing even people of the Arian faith, and ordered the faith of the Arian doctrine to be preached, that you exiled and tortured and killed those who believed in the only Son of God. 
 Stop, I say, claiming that you live and flourish in the kingdom because you did these things, and are acting so, when you hear the just man Job, whom God said served Him without complaint, whom He declared to be His true worshiper, saying that although many act impiously, they live most pleasantly in this life.

Take heed of what he says about you wicked ones, and realize how, despite your evil deeds, you are spared for a time, and present yourself to God through repentance. 
 I did not know that such darkness would come before my face.

Why, Lord, could I not hide for one hour? But the wicked pass through foreign lands, and have taken flocks of sheep with their shepherds, and have afflicted the livestock of orphans, and have taken the ox of the widow as a pledge, and have harvested fields not their own before their time, and forced men to work in their vineyards without pay, and have stripped many, and taken bread from the hungry, and besieged many with hunger, and have not understood the way of justice.

Cursed be their portion on earth. For what hope is there for a wicked man, even though he waits and trusts in the Lord if he might be saved? 
 But if they strengthen themselves and gather as much silver as the dust and gold as the mud, the righteous will possess all these things.

Therefore, emperor, do not unjustly flatter yourself, because as we have stated, you think that you live so long in this life because your deeds are pleasing to God. 
 Your deeds are like those condemned by the Holy Spirit through the mouth of Isaiah: 
 Thus says the Lord who has redeemed you, the Holy One of Israel: I am God, I have shown you the way to walk; and if you had listened to my commandments, your peace would have been like a river, and your righteousness like the waves of the sea, and your offspring would have been like the sand, and the descendants of your womb like its grains.

But, you say, these things were said to the Jews; indeed to those, of whom...

You have imitated; and now, as it is often said, change your wicked ways, believe as the holy Church believes, and you will be forgiven in everything.

For He Himself says: Return 
 to me with all your heart, with fasting, and weeping, and mourning, and tear your hearts and not your garments. Return to God with all your heart, accept these healthy remedies to understand your crime; open the eyes of your heart, groan with all your heart realizing how seriously you have sinned; then He will have mercy on you. He who says: When you have turned and groaned, then you will be saved, and you will know where you have been.

Remember God dedicated the prophet to say: I do not want the death of the dying, says the Lord, as much as to turn and live. Do not feel anymore that when your works are evil, you think you are acting well, why have you not immediately received punishment for your deeds, but look at what is written, that the Lord is patient so that you may repent.

Do not say: I have sinned, and what sad thing has happened to me? for the Most High is a patient rewarder. Listen also to blessed Paul inviting you to God, revealing to you how to appease Him, that He is patient for this reason, and that He does not immediately present the rewards of your deeds, because He wants you to finally emerge from evil through repentance, through true satisfaction. Do you despise the riches of His kindness and patience, not knowing that the kindness of God leads you to repentance?

But according to your hardness and unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath for yourself in the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to each according to his work. Return, Constant, to God: against the robbery of your inner enemy, take up the weapons of repentance; flee flatterers, who have not considered saying what they have, pernicious praise; remember that the Lord said through Isaiah: Those who call you happy deceive you, and disturb the paths of your feet.

Those who call you happy, lead you astray, and disturb the path of your feet. Believe in the only Son of God, accept the forgiveness of your crimes, repeat the psalmist's words; In the underworld who will confess to you? and again: Will the dust make confession to you? Return to God, groan for your crimes, listen to the voice of the Lord through Jeremiah saying: Will he who falls not rise again, or he who turns away not return? You fell the day you denied the Son of God; you will rise the hour you confess: because the enemy's wound has settled in you, surrender yourself to healing medicine, He Himself will apply the remedy to you.

You wounded yourself by saying: He is not the true Son of God, you will heal yourself again if you say what we say and believe that He is the true Son of God. Return 
 for He is merciful and compassionate, patient.

Says Joel, 
 to the Lord your God, for He is merciful and kind and patient, and full of compassion, and who changes His judgment against the imposed wrongdoing.

If you consider rejecting this promised forgiveness for your crimes, you will desire to obtain it there, where you will receive nothing but the torment of punishments.