In this book, against all the Scriptures, you will find Christ, who alone committed no sin, confessing to his own sin, and being almost forced by his mother Mary to receive John's Baptism. Likewise, when he was baptized, fire was seen over the water, which is written in no Gospel. After such a long time, Peter and Paul, after sharing the Gospel in Jerusalem and mutual deliberation and argument and planning of things to be done, finally in the City as if for the first time knowing each other. And some other similarly absurd and disgraceful inventions, all of which you will find accumulated in that book.

But those who are not ignorant of the nature of the Holy Spirit understand that what is said about the fire is said about the Spirit itself. For in the Acts of the Apostles, according to this same promise of our Lord, on the very day of Pentecost when the Holy Spirit descended upon the disciples so that they might be baptized in it, tongues like fire were seen resting on each one, so that it was clear they were baptized in the Holy Spirit and in fire.

That is, in that Spirit which was either fire or like fire, such as the fire that burned in the bush and did not consume the bush, and the fire that is the spirit of Angels, as the Scripture says: 
He makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flaming fire
 (Psalm 104:4).

If you are similar to or a companion or participant in this, you can fear no fire, not even the one that will precede the Lord on the day of judgment and set the whole world ablaze (Psalm 97:3), except for those who have been baptized in the Holy Spirit and fire.

And indeed the Spirit remains invisible to men today, as the Lord says: 
The Spirit blows where it wills, and you do not know where it comes from or where it goes
 (John 3:8).

But at the beginning of the mystery of faith and spiritual Baptism, this same Spirit was visibly seen and rested upon the disciples like fire. Likewise, when the heavens opened, it descended upon the Lord in the form of a dove. Many things, indeed almost all that were to come were made manifest. Although they are now invisible, they are nevertheless shown to the eyes and incredulity of men, either in part, or at times, or in a figure to strengthen and confirm our faith.

But I should not omit what the Gospel rightly preaches. For our Lord says to the paralytic: 
Take heart, son, your sins are forgiven
 (Matthew 9:2). To show that hearts are cleansed by faith to obtain the remission of sins. This remission of sins was also obtained by the woman who was a sinner in the city, to whom the Lord said: 
Your sins are forgiven
 (Luke 7:48, 50).

When those who were reclining with him began to say to themselves: 
Who is this who forgives sins?
 which also the scribes and Pharisees murmured more harshly about the paralytic, the Lord said to the woman: 
Your faith has saved you, go in peace
. From all these it is shown that hearts are cleansed by faith, but souls are washed by the Spirit. Furthermore, through the water...

Bodies and blood reach more quickly through shortcuts to the rewards of salvation.

19. I think we have fully explained the preaching of John the Baptist, from where we began our discussion.

He said to the Jews: 
I
 indeed baptize you with water for repentance.

But he who comes after me is mightier than I, whose sandal strap I am not worthy to untie.

He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.

Luke chapter 3, verse 16.

I believe we have also adequately addressed the teaching of the Apostle John, who said that three bear witness: the Spirit, the water, and the blood, and these three are one.

First John chapter 5, verse 8.

Unless I am mistaken, we also clarified what our Lord said: John indeed baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.

Acts chapter 1, verse 5.

Furthermore, I think we have given a solid explanation for the cause of the custom.

Nevertheless, let us defend, even if we do so later, so no one thinks we are stirring up the present argument with a single point.

Although this custom alone should hold a principal place among people who have the fear of God and humility.