Prologue.
1. I received your letter, dear Peter, in which you mentioned your desire to go to Jerusalem and asked to be instructed by our letters on the rule of true faith that you should uphold in those parts, so that no heretical falsehood could deceive you.
I am indeed glad that you are concerned with keeping the true faith free from any taint of perfidy, without which no conversion can be beneficial, indeed, it cannot even exist.
Apostolic authority says that without faith it is impossible to please God (Hebrews 11:6).
Faith is the foundation of all good things.
Faith is the beginning of human salvation.
Without this, no one can belong to the number of God's children; for without it, neither in this world does anyone obtain the grace of justification, nor in the future will they possess eternal life.
If one does not walk by faith here, they will not reach the vision.
Without faith, all human effort is in vain.
It is like someone who, wanting to reach a homeland where they know they will live happily, leaves the correct path and imprudently follows error, not reaching the blessed city but falling into a pit, where no joy is given to the arriver, but destruction is brought to the faller.
2. However, for a sufficient discourse on faith to be delivered, neither is there enough time because you wish to have our response quickly, nor is the task of this discussion small, as it could scarcely be completed even with long speeches.
For you did not ask to be instructed on faith in such a way that you would specify one particular heresy against which our discussion would be focused.
But since you ask for a definition of faith in general and wish it to be concluded briefly, you can see how impossible it is for us to fully comprehend such a great matter in a short time.
We could not be sufficient for this even if we had ample time and the kind of intellect that would allow us to write many volumes on what you ask of us.
But because God is near to all who call upon Him in truth...
The Lord is near to all who call on him, to all who call on him in truth.
He will fulfill the desire of those who fear him; he also will hear their cry and will save them.
I hope that, just as he has given you a holy concern for this faith, he will also give me the ability to serve your good and praiseworthy desire adequately.
Even if I cannot explain everything from which every heretical error can be recognized and, once recognized, either refuted or avoided, I will, with the name and help of the Holy Trinity, who is the one true and good God, speak of those things in which the reason for the Catholic faith is contained without any shadow of error.
By holding on to these, you will also be able to identify and avoid those things which, even if they are not specifically refuted in this work, will be shown by what is generally and absolutely stated here to be the inventions of human error, not taught by the rule of divine truth.
Wherever you are, because, according to the rule proclaimed by our Savior, you know you were baptized in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, hold fast with all your heart to the belief that the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God.
This means that the holy and ineffable Trinity is naturally one God, as it is said in Deuteronomy: "Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one."
And, "You shall worship the Lord your God and him only shall you serve."
However, because we have said that this one God, who alone is true and naturally God, is not the Father alone, nor the Son alone, nor the Holy Spirit alone, but the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit together, we must be careful not to say or believe that the Father is the same as the Son or the Holy Spirit, or that the Son is the same as the Father or the Holy Spirit, or that the Holy Spirit is the same as the Father or the Son.
This would be entirely wrong.
The faith that the holy patriarchs and prophets received from God before the incarnation of the Son of God, and which the holy apostles heard from the Lord himself while he was on earth and, being instructed by the Holy Spirit, not only preached in words but also left in their writings for the most beneficial instruction of future generations, proclaims one God in the Trinity, that is, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
But the Trinity would not be true if the same person were called Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
If the substance of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit were the same, but the person were also the same, there would be nothing in which the Trinity could truly be said to exist.
Furthermore, the Trinity would not be true if the one God, who is the Trinity, were not one in nature but different in nature as the persons are distinct from one another.
But because in that one true God, the Trinity, it is naturally true not only that he is one God but also that he is the Trinity, he is therefore the true God in persons and one in nature.
Through this natural unity, the Father is entirely in the Son and the Holy Spirit, the Son is entirely in the Father and the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit is entirely in the Father and the Son.
No one of them exists outside of any of the others because none precedes the others in eternity, exceeds them in greatness, or surpasses them in power.
For neither the Son nor the Holy Spirit, as far as the unity of divine nature is concerned, is either anterior or greater.
For indeed, the Father is not greater than the Son or the Holy Spirit regarding the unity of the divine nature, nor is He prior or greater. The Father is neither prior nor greater than the Son (as stated in the same text, chapter "Nunc postquam"); nor can the eternity and immensity of the Son, as if prior or greater, naturally precede or exceed the eternity and immensity of the Holy Spirit. Just as the Son is not posterior or lesser than the Father, the Holy Spirit is not posterior or lesser than the Son. For what is eternal and without beginning is that the Son was born from the nature of the Father; and what is eternal and without beginning is that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the nature of the Father and the Son. Therefore, we rightly believe and say that the three are one God, because there is one eternity, one immensity, one divinity of the three persons by nature.
So, let us hold that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are naturally one God; yet the Father is not the Son, the Son is not the Father, and the Holy Spirit is not the Father or the Son (as all Catholics agree). There is one essence of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, which the Greeks call "ousia," in which the Father is not something different, nor the Son, nor the Holy Spirit, though personally the Father is different, the Son is different, and the Holy Spirit is different. This is clearly demonstrated to us at the very beginning of the Holy Scriptures, where God says, "Let us make man in our image and likeness" (Genesis 1:26). When He says "image" in the singular, He shows that there is one nature in whose image man is made. But when He says "our" in the plural, He shows that the same God in whose image man is made is not one person. If in that one nature of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, there were only one person, it would not say "in our image," but "in my image;" nor would it say "let us make," but "let me make." If, however, there were three substances to be understood or believed in those three persons, it would not say "in our image," but "in our images;" for one image could not belong to three unequal natures. But since man is said to be made in the one image of one God, the essential divinity of the Holy Trinity is intimated. Then, and a little later, for what God had previously said, "Let us make man in our image and likeness," Scripture narrates as follows: "And God made man: in the image of God, He made him" (Genesis 1:27).
The prophet Isaiah did not keep silent about this revelation of the Trinity of persons and unity of nature, as he says he saw the Seraphim crying out: "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts" (Isaiah 6:3). Where the third "Holy" is said, we recognize the Trinity of persons; and where "Lord God of hosts" is said once, we recognize the unity of the divine nature. In that holy Trinity, which is repeated by us so that it may be more firmly engraved in your heart, there is one Father, who alone essentially begot one Son from Himself; and there is one Son, who alone is essentially born from one Father; and there is one Holy Spirit, who alone essentially proceeds from the Father and the Son. The same person could not do all this, that is, beget Himself, be born from Himself, and proceed from Himself. Therefore, since begetting is different from being born, and proceeding is different from begetting or being born, it is clear that the Father is different, the Son is different, and the Holy Spirit is different. Thus, the Trinity refers to the persons of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, while the unity refers to the nature.
Just as, according to that divinity in which the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are one, we do not believe that the Father was born, nor the Holy Spirit, but only the Son; so also...
The Catholic faith believes and proclaims that the Son was born only according to the flesh.
In that Trinity, it is proper to the Father alone that He was not born, but begot the only Son.
It is proper to the Son alone that He was not the begetter but was born from the essence of the Father alone.
And it is proper to the Holy Spirit that He was neither born nor begot, but proceeds from the Father and the Son.
If, according to the divine nature, God the Father was not born from any God, He would still be born from a virgin according to the flesh.
If the Father were born of a virgin, He would be both the Father and the Son in one person.
But if this one person were born only from a virgin and not from God, He would be truly called not the Son of God, but only the son of man.
The Son of God Himself would not say, "For God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son," (John 3:16).
And again, "For God did not send His Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through Him," (John 3:17).
Nor would the blessed John say, "Whoever loves the father loves the child born of him," (1 John 5:1).
Nor would the Son Himself say, "My Father is always at His work to this very day, and I too am working," (John 5:17).
For if the one who is called the Son were also the Father, He would not truly be called the Son of God, because He would be born only from a virgin and not from God.
Finally, the Father Himself would not testify from heaven and declare with an audible voice that Jesus is His Son, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," (Matthew 3:17).
Apostle Paul also would not say of God the Father, "He who did not spare His own Son, but gave Him up for us all," (Romans 8:32).
Since all these things are divinely spoken for our teaching and because they are divine sayings, they are surely true.
It is true that the Catholic faith preaches that the Son alone was born of the Father according to divinity, eternal with the Father, immortal, impassible, and unchangeable God.
And according to the flesh, it was not the Father but His only begotten Son who was born in time, suffered while preserving His impassibility, died while preserving His immortality, and was truly resurrected while preserving His unchangeability.
He has everything in common with the Father that He naturally had from eternity without beginning, and nothing in common with the Father in those things that He, the eternal and exalted One, took upon Himself humbly and temporarily in His own person.
Again, if not the one who is the proper and only begotten Son of God the Father, but the Holy Spirit were born from a virgin, the holy Church would not accept and confess in faith the Son who was made of a woman, made under the law, born of the Holy Spirit from the Virgin Mary.
If the Holy Spirit, who is the Spirit of the Father and the Son, took on the form of a servant, He would not descend from heaven in the form of a dove upon the man made flesh.
Therefore, God the Father, not born of any God, once begot from His own nature without beginning the Son, equal to Himself, and naturally eternal with the same divinity as He Himself.
The same eternal and true Son of God, who is naturally one God with the Father according to divinity, as it is said:
Therefore, the one and the same Son of God was born before all ages and was born in time. Both births are of the one Son of God: divine, according to which he is the creator in the form of God, co-eternal with the Father; human, according to which he emptied himself, taking the form of a servant. Not only did he form himself in the conception of his mother's womb when he became man, but he also emerged from the same maternal womb as God made man. He hung on the cross as God made man, lay in the tomb for three days as God made man, and rose from the dead on the third day as God made man. In the tomb, he lay in the flesh only, and descended to the underworld in the soul only. On the third day, when the soul returned from the underworld to the flesh, he rose from the tomb as God in the flesh. On the fortieth day after the resurrection, he ascended to heaven as God made man and sat at the right hand of God, from where he will come at the end of the world to judge the living and the dead.
Therefore, the Word made flesh is one Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, the mediator of God and humans. He is the mediator because he is both true God and true man, having one nature of divinity with the Father, and one substance of humanity with the mother. He bore the penalty of our sins from us unto death; he has the unchangeable justice from God the Father. He died temporally because of our sin, but because of his justice, he is always alive and will grant immortality to mortals. He preserved his perfect humanity in the perfection of his divinity; he absorbed the truth of his mortality through the acceptance of death, with the truth and unchangeability of his immortality.
This is what blessed Peter testifies, that Christ swallowed death so that we might become heirs of eternal life (1 Peter 3:22). Blessed Paul also teaches that Christ swallowed death and brought light to life and incorruption (2 Timothy 1:10). Christ tasted death because he is true man; the same Christ swallowed death because he is true God. As the Apostle says, he died in weakness, but he lives by the power of God (2 Corinthians 13:4): the same one who, according to the prophecy of blessed David, became man in Zion and established it the Most High (Psalm 86:5).
Therefore, the divinity of Christ is not separate from the nature of the Father, as it is written:
Because the Word became flesh and lived among us. That nature which is always begotten from the Father took on our nature without sin, to be born of a virgin.
For the eternal and divine nature could not temporally conceive and be born from human nature in any way, unless the ineffable divinity in itself accepted true human conception and birth temporally.
Thus, God is eternal and true. He was truly conceived and born from a virgin in time.
When the fullness of time came, God sent His Son, born of a woman, born under the law, to redeem those under the law, that we might receive adoption as sons. God became the Son of Man by nature, who is naturally the Son of God the Father.
John the evangelist confirms this, saying, "The Word became flesh and lived among us," and then adds, "We have seen His glory, the glory as of the Only Begotten from the Father, full of grace and truth."
The creator and Lord of all spirits and bodies, that is, of all natures, created the virgin, to be created from the virgin. He made His own mother, when He took true flesh from her to be conceived and born. Thus, God became mercifully human in the truth of a servant's form, and in the form of God, remaining naturally true as God and human.
Therefore, believe that Christ, the Son of God, one of the Trinity, is true God, and do not doubt that His divinity is from the nature of the Father. Believe that He is truly human, and that His flesh is not of a celestial, airy, or any other nature, but the same nature as all human flesh.
God formed the first human from the earth and forms other humans from humans through propagation. Although Christ's flesh and all human flesh are of the same nature, the flesh that God the Word united with Himself from the Virgin Mary was conceived without sin, born without sin. Thus, the eternal and just God was mercifully conceived, born, and crucified as the Lord of glory.
But how can we describe the unique excellence of that flesh, whose divine person is from its very conception, whose birth is unusual, so that the Word became flesh, and was one person with His flesh, the Only Begotten and eternal God? Human flesh is born through human copulation, with the man planting the seed and the woman conceiving and giving birth.
And because when a man and woman unite to generate children, there is parental lust involved, the conception of children from their flesh cannot be without sin. It is not propagation that transmits sin to infants, but lust. It is not the fertility of human nature that makes humans be born with sin, but the foulness of lust, which humans have from the just condemnation of that first sin. Therefore, blessed David, although born from a legitimate and just marriage, where neither the guilt of infidelity nor the stain of fornication could be found, cries out because of original sin, to which the children of wrath are naturally bound. This includes not only the children of the impious but also all born of the sanctified flesh of the just.
Look, I was conceived in sin, and my mother gave birth to me in guilt.
Even Saint Job says that a person cannot be pure from filth, not even if his life on earth is just one day long.
Therefore, the only begotten Son of God, who is in the bosom of the Father, took on human flesh and a rational soul to purify both body and soul.
He, who is truly God, became truly man, not as a different God or a different man, but the same God and the same man.
To remove the sin that human generation contracted through mortal flesh, He was conceived in a new way: God incarnate in a virgin mother, without a man's involvement, without the lust of the virgin conceiving.
Through God made man, conceived without lust and born from the untouched womb of the virgin, the sin that all humans are born with is cleansed.
In this mortal body, mothers cannot fulfill the work of fertility unless they first lose the virginity of their flesh.
Only the only begotten God removed the sin of human conception and birth.
When He was conceived, He took the true nature of flesh from the virgin, and when He was born, He preserved the virginity of His mother.
This is why God became the Son of the Virgin Mary, and Mary, a virgin, became the mother of the only begotten God.
The one whom the Father begot from eternity, the virgin brought forth in time.
This virgin, whom God, who was to be born from her, filled with special grace so that she had in her womb the one whom the universe has as Lord from the beginning, and saw Him born in a solemn manner, whom not only human but also angelic beings recognize and adore as the Most High in the unity of the Father's substance.
Thus, the sin and the punishment of sin, which entered the world through the crime of a corrupted woman, are removed from the world through the birth of an untouched virgin.
In the condition of the human race, through a woman made from a man alone, we were bound by the chain of death.
In redeeming the human race, divine goodness acted so that through a man born from a woman alone, life was restored to humans.
There, the devil associated human nature with the likeness of sin through a wicked deception.
Here, God took human nature into the unity of His person.
There, a woman was deceived to become the daughter of the devil.
Here, a virgin was filled with grace to become the mother of the supreme and unchangeable only begotten God.
There, an angel, cast down by pride, took hold of the mind of the deceived woman.
Here, God, humbling Himself through mercy, filled the womb of an untouched virgin from which He was to be born.
The Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was in the form of God (which He could not be unless He was born from the nature of the Father), according to apostolic teaching, emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant.
Therefore, He took the form of a servant, that is, the nature of a servant, into His person.
Thus, the creator of humans was made in the likeness of humans and was found in appearance as a man.
He humbled Himself, becoming obedient to the Father to the point of death, even death on a cross.
Therefore, consider this statement of the Apostle carefully, and in it, you will understand how to believe that the Lord Jesus Christ is both God and man.
Do not confuse or divide the truth of both natures in one person.
When you first hear about the Lord Jesus Christ being in the form of God, you should recognize and firmly hold that the term "form" implies natural fullness.
The nature of God the Father has always been, from whom He was born.
Therefore, He is of one nature with the Father, equally eternal and immense, equally immortal and unchangeable, equally invisible and ineffable, equally good and just, equally compassionate and merciful, patient and very merciful and truthful, equally strong and gentle, equally wise and omnipotent.
Therefore, hold firmly in faith all these things we have said about the Son of God, because He, having all these in the unity of nature with the Father, is undoubtedly equal to the Father.
For this reason, the Apostle immediately adds, saying, "He did not consider it robbery to be equal to God" (Philippians 2:6).
For the equality of the Son with the Father in divinity was not a robbery, but of nature.
Also, what the Apostle subsequently adds, saying, "He emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and being found in appearance as a man; He humbled Himself, becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross," all these things about that only-begotten God the Son of God, about that Word of God of whom the evangelist says, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" (John 1:1); about that power of God and wisdom of God, of whom it is said to God, "You have made all things in wisdom" (Psalm 104:24); about that principle with which the Father Himself is one principle, and in which He made heaven and earth, that is, all spiritual and corporeal nature; about the only-begotten God, who is in the bosom of the Father, as I said, take all these things personally: yet preserving His eternity, immensity, immortality, unchangeability, invisibility of His divinity.
These things the Son of God naturally and equally has in common with God the Father, so that although He was truly made man for us, He remained equal to the true God the Father, from whom He was born, true God and Truth.
He therefore emptied Himself, but from His fullness we have all received (John 1:16): if He had lost His fullness by emptying Himself, He would certainly not have what to give us.
However, if He did not have it, we would undoubtedly receive nothing.
From His fullness we have all received.
Therefore, from what He gave us from His fullness, He showed that even when He emptied Himself, He did not lose the fullness He had: because if He had lost His fullness, He could not give from it at all.
He took the form of a servant: for the emptying of the supreme God was nothing else but the acceptance of the form of a servant, that is, human nature.
Therefore, both forms are in Christ, because both the divine and human natures are true and complete in Christ.
That is why the holy Evangelist proclaims Him full of grace and truth (John 1:14), because He is full in divine nature, in which God is Truth; and in human nature, in which man is made true through grace, He is full.
In that fullness, He is God, in the form of God equal to God; in this fullness, a servant, in the form of a servant, because He was made in the likeness of men, and was found in appearance as a man.
Therefore, emptying Himself, He took the form of a servant to become a servant; but He did not lose the fullness of the form of God, in which He is always the eternal and unchangeable Lord: made according to the form of a servant, a true man, of the same nature as His servant mother; and remaining in the form of God, a true God, of the same nature as His Lord Father.
In the form of God, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, He is the one and only Creator of all things; according to the form of a servant, He alone was formed by His and the Father's and the Holy Spirit's operation: what He is as Creator, He naturally shares with the Father and the Holy Spirit, but as created, He took the form of a servant according to which He was created.
These parts are missing, the form of a servant according to which he was created, from all manuscripts.
And indeed, not inappropriately.
He alone personally possesses it in himself.
Whose future birth according to the flesh, and death, and resurrection, and ascension into heaven, the law and the prophets never ceased to foretell, as he himself commanded, obeying both in words and deeds.
For even in the sacrifices of carnal victims, which the Holy Trinity itself, who is the one God of the New and Old Testament, commanded our fathers to offer, the most pleasing gift of that sacrifice was signified, by which for us the God the Son alone would mercifully offer himself according to the flesh.
For he, according to apostolic teaching, offered himself for us as an offering and sacrifice to God in a sweet-smelling aroma.
He is the true God and the true high priest, who for us entered into the holy place not by the blood of bulls and goats, but by his own blood once for all.
This was signified by that high priest who entered the holy of holies with blood annually.
Therefore, he is the one who in himself exhibited everything necessary for our redemption, being both the priest and the sacrifice, the same God and the temple:
the priest, through whom we are reconciled;
the sacrifice, by which we are reconciled;
the temple, in which we are reconciled;
the God, to whom we are reconciled.
Yet, he alone is the priest, sacrifice, and temple, because all these things are God according to the form of a servant; but not God alone, because this is with the Father and the Holy Spirit according to the form of God.
Therefore, we are reconciled through the Son alone according to the flesh, but not to the Son alone according to divinity.
For the Trinity reconciled us to itself through the fact that the Trinity made the Word flesh.
In whom the unchangeable truth of both human and divine nature remains, so that just as his divinity, which he has unchangeable from the Father, is always true, so his humanity, which the highest divinity has united to itself, is always true and unchangeable.
I have inserted these few points about the faith of the Holy Trinity, who is the only true God by nature, as much as the brevity of time and speech allowed.
Now I will tell you what you should believe without doubt about creation.
Hold firmly, therefore, that every nature which is not the Trinity, God, was created out of nothing by the Holy Trinity, who is the one true and eternal God.
Thus, everything in the heavens and on the earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones, dominions, principalities, or powers, is the work and creation of the Holy Trinity, who is the one God, the creator and Lord of all things, eternal, omnipotent, just, and good, naturally having always existed and being unable to change.
And this God, who has always existed without a beginning because he is supremely existent, gave things created by him to exist:
yet not without a beginning, because no creature is of the same nature as the Trinity, the one true and good God, by whom all things were created.
And because he is supremely good, he gave all natures which he made to be good:
yet not as good as the creator of all good things, who is not only supremely good but also the highest and unchangeable good, because he is the eternal good;
having no defect, because he was not made from nothing;
having no progress, because he has no beginning.
Therefore, creatures made by God can progress because they began to exist; they can decline because they were made from nothing.
The condition of their origin leads them to defect, but the operation of the Creator advances them to progress.
Thus, in the first place, the eternity of the Trinity, who is the true God, is naturally recognized without a beginning, because he made some things so that, although they began to exist, they can never cease to exist.
In this, his omnipotence is understood, because he created all things.
He made the visible and the invisible, meaning both the physical and the spiritual, out of nothing.
In these, the diversity of things greatly commends the goodness and omnipotence of the Creator.
If He were not all-powerful, He would not have made the highest and the lowest with the same ease.
And if He were not supremely good, He would not have taken care of even the lowest things.
Celestial and earthly bodies are different.
Therefore, in both great and small created things, the goodness and omnipotence of the Creator are great.
For He made everything wisely with supreme and true wisdom, to whom it is natural to be wise and to act wisely.
The simplicity of God's manifold wisdom commends the greatness of His majesty, not only in the greatness of the high creatures but also in the smallness of the lowly ones.
While all the good things He created are much lower and more unlike their creator, not being made from Him but entirely from nothing, they are also not equal among themselves.
Each thing remains as it was made by God to be, some in one way and some in another.
For bodies were not given existence in the same way that spirits were, and even bodies are not equal among themselves.
There is diversity among celestial and earthly bodies, with celestial bodies differing in size and brightness.
As the Apostle says, "There is one glory of the celestial bodies and another of the earthly bodies."
Even among celestial bodies, there is one glory of the sun, another of the moon, and another of the stars, for star differs from star in glory.
The diversity of physical natures shows that each of them does not have what it has from itself but from the disposition and work of the most omnipotent, unchangeable, and wise Creator.
God is everywhere.
If any physical creature were of the same nature as the Holy Trinity, which is one God, it would not be in any place locally, nor would it ever experience temporal change, nor move from place to place, nor be limited by its size.
All these things show that the maker of such natures is He to whom no place is wide or narrow because He is wholly present in both narrow and wide places.
He is not changed by time because He alone can wonderfully order the course of time, not with temporal change but with eternal stability.
He does not think in time about how the series of times passes by the succession and departure of things.
Nor is He limited by any size of mass because He is not confined by any boundary.
He is not distributed through parts of the world by His parts, filling larger parts with larger portions and smaller parts with smaller portions, yet is never entirely absent from any part.
He is God who says, "I fill heaven and earth."
Therefore, everything He made, that is, spirits and bodies, the highest and the lowest, celestial and earthly, living and those to which He did not give the ability to live, the Lord God ineffably fills and contains everywhere wholly.
He is not divided in things that are divided, nor is He changed in things that change.
If He were not naturally unchangeable, the unchangeable order of His counsel and disposition would never remain in mutable things.
God is the life of all things.
God, the immense creator of physical and non-physical things, first shows that He is not a body because He did not give life to some bodies, even though He created all bodies.
He is naturally life because if He were not life, He would not have made living bodies.
Nothing that isn't alive can make something alive.
Therefore, bodies that cannot live at all are not of the same nature as God.
Similarly, those bodies are not of the same nature as God, even if they contain individual, irrational spirits that give them life and sensation.
Nor are the irrational spirits themselves of the same nature as God, even though they are known to provide life and sensation to bodies; these spirits have no light of understanding to know or love their creator.
Even the spirits that are undoubtedly rational and intellectual cannot be of the same nature as God, who is naturally unchanging and immense.
Although God has no diversity in Himself, He shows diversity in His operations through these rational and intellectual spirits.
For instance, those spirits that are inserted into earthly and mortal bodies do not move locally; they are present entirely in whole bodies and entirely in their parts.
However, the variety of thoughts shows a certain temporal motion and change in them; sometimes they know, sometimes they don't; sometimes they will, sometimes they won't; sometimes they are wise, sometimes they are foolish; sometimes they are unjust from being just, and sometimes they become just from being unjust; sometimes they are enlightened by the light of piety, and sometimes they are darkened by the error of impiety.
It is evident that angels, who are not burdened by any earthly matter, are not of the same nature as God but are made from nothing.
Their natural mutability is known because part of their nature has changed for the worse.
Those who have not been corrupted continuously receive the sweetness of the Lord's abundance, given by Him who created them from nothing, and they do not falter by their natural condition.
Although they cling to God without any temporal variability, as they have received the gift of eternal incorruption and immutability, they still have a natural limit distinguishing them from each other, as none of them exist in another.
When one of them is tasked with a particular work, another is assigned to a different task by divine authority.
All these things show that even the holy angels are creations of the Holy Trinity, whose marvelous wisdom and power are evident in the disposition and operation of every single thing He has made as He wished.
Therefore, God created some spirits to exist forever and others to cease existing as spirits at some point.
He brought forth some of these ceasing spirits from water and others from earth, as He wished.
Superior spirits were made to have no natural connection with bodily elements; He created them eternal and gave them the ability and intelligence to think about, know, and love divinity.
He created them in such a way that they would love Him above themselves, recognizing they were created by His work without any preceding merit.
To ensure this love would have just and appropriate praise, He also granted them the freedom of will, allowing them to direct their holy love either towards Him, who is above them, or towards themselves or things below them, by misguided desire.
It is not in the nature of anything to exist forever, whether in misery or happiness, unless it can think of God by the gift of God Himself.
This intellectual nature exists in the souls of humans and the spirits of angels.
For God gave the ability to know and love Him only to angels and humans.
Because of the freedom of will, which ought to be given to an intellectual creature by the Creator's kindness, He granted them the ability and the will to know and love Him, so that each one could both possess and lose it.
However, if anyone willingly lost it, they could not retrieve it by their own will.
So, the beginnings of holy thoughts would be infused again into those He wanted by the free gift of His goodness, which, at the very beginning of creation, arranged spirits and bodies, places and emotions, as He wisely willed, in a wonderfully fitting manner.
Therefore, angels and humans, because they were made rational, received the gift of eternity and blessedness from the creation of their spiritual nature.
If they continually adhered to the love of their Creator, they would remain eternal and blessed together.
But if, by their own free will, they tried to do their own will against the command of the highest Creator, blessedness would immediately leave the disobedient, and a miserable eternity would be left to them, tormenting them with errors and pains.
And concerning the angels, He decided and fulfilled that if any of them lost the goodness of their will, they would never restore it by divine gift.
Therefore, the part of the angels that departed from their Creator God, by whom alone they were blessed, found the beginning of their damnation in their voluntary turning away.
So, beginning to be punished was nothing other than being deprived of the love of that blessed good.
God commanded that they remain in eternal punishment, and also prepared for them eternal fire.
In this fire, all the rebellious angels would never be able to escape their evil will or their punishment.
As the evil of unjust turning away remains in them, so also the eternal damnation of just retribution remains.
Their leader, the devil, led the first humans into sin out of envy, and not only them but also their entire offspring inherited the merit of death with the vice of sin.
But God, merciful and just, just as He confirmed the other angels in the eternity of His love when the devil and his angels fell by their own will, did not allow the entire human race to perish forever.
Instead, His free goodness predestined those He wanted to be brought back to the light, rejecting the darkness in which every human birth is involved due to the condemnation of original sin.
He demonstrated this especially by freeing those from the bonds of original sin by the undeserved grace of the Redeemer, while eternal damnation held others, especially infants, who could not have any merits, good or bad, of their own will.
The beginning of good will and thought is not born of man himself but is prepared and given by God.
It shows that neither the devil nor any of his angels, having been cast down into this lower darkness due to their fall, could regain or will ever be able to regain a good will.
If it were possible for human nature, after turning away from God and losing the goodness of its will, to regain it by itself, it would be much more possible for the angelic nature to do so.
This is because angels are less burdened by the weight of an earthly body, and thus would have this ability to a greater extent.
But God has shown from where a good will is given to humans, which the angels lost when they had it, and now cannot regain it.
Therefore, since a good will is worthy of eternal happiness through God’s grace, and angelic and human wickedness should not go unpunished, we faithfully expect, according to the rule of the Catholic faith, that the Son of God will come to punish all sinful angels and to judge the living and the dead.
For blessed Peter testifies that God did not spare the angels who sinned, but cast them into hell, delivering them to be kept in chains of darkness until judgment (2 Peter 2:4).
About judging the living and the dead, blessed Paul says: I charge you in the presence of God and Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom (2 Timothy 4:1).
At his coming, from the body of the first man, which God formed from the earth, to the bodies of all people, which began to live when they were given a soul, they will be raised by the one who created them.
Each body will be given back to its individual soul in the resurrection, which began in the wombs of their mothers so that they might start living.
This is so that the souls, at the judgment of the just Judge, may receive retribution in their own bodies, whether it be for the kingdom or for punishment, according to the quality of life they had in the present life.
The origin of a bad life.
The quality of a bad life begins with unbelief, which takes its start from the guilt of original sin.
Whoever begins to live in such a way that they end their life before being freed from this obligation, if their soul lived in the body for even one day or one hour, it must endure the endless punishments of hell with that same body.
There, the devil with his angels will burn forever, who was the first to sin and persuaded the first humans to sin.
There, too, will be the fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, effeminate, homosexuals, thieves, the greedy, drunkards, slanderers, and robbers.
All those who commit the works of the flesh, which the blessed Apostle says will not inherit the kingdom of God (Galatians 5:21), if they have not turned from their evil ways before the end of this life, will be burned in eternal fires.
For every person who remains in the delight of iniquities and the hardness of heart until the end in this world, as harmful pleasure held them here, so will eternal torment hold them without end.
The bodies of the wicked.
There will also be a resurrection of the wicked, but without the transformation that God will give only to those who live justly in faith.
This is what blessed Paul means when he says: We shall all indeed rise, but we shall not all be changed (1 Corinthians 15:51).
Showing that the just will be changed by divine gift, he says: And we shall be changed (1 Corinthians 15:52).
So, the wicked will share in the common resurrection of the flesh with the just, but they will not have the grace of transformation, which will be given to the just.
For the corruption, dishonor, and weakness in which the bodies of the wicked are sown will not be removed from them, and these will not be extinguished by death.
This is so that the constant torment of the body and soul will be the punishment of eternal death.
But the just souls, whom the Redeemer God has justified here by grace through faith, will...
God grants the grace of living well and the perseverance to continue to the end.
In the very bodies in which they received the grace of justification from God here, and in which they lived justified by faith, in the love of God and neighbor, they will enjoy the eternal happiness of the heavenly kingdom.
Their bodies will be glorified, and without a doubt, while remaining truly of the flesh, as God created them, they will not be like earthly bodies but will be spiritual.
For the bodies of the saints, which are sown as natural bodies, will rise as spiritual bodies.
Through this transformation, which is given only to the just, it will be fulfilled as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:53), "This perishable body must put on imperishability, and this mortal body must put on immortality."
The male and female sexes, as the same bodies were created, will remain.
Their glory will vary according to the diversity of their good deeds.
Nonetheless, all bodies, whether male or female, that are in that kingdom, will be glorious.
The Judge knows how much glory to give each one, because He justified them freely by His mercy in this life and intends to glorify them by His justice there.
God gave humans the time to acquire eternal life only in this life, where He also made repentance fruitful.
Here, repentance is fruitful because a person can live well after abandoning wickedness, change their unjust will, alter their merits and deeds, and act in the fear of God to please Him.
Whoever does not do this in this life will indeed have repentance in the future world for their sins, but will not find forgiveness before God.
Because although there will be the sting of remorse, there will no longer be any correction of the will there.
Such people will condemn their own iniquity, but they will not be able to love or desire righteousness.
Their will shall be such that it will always have the punishment of their wickedness, but will never be able to receive the affection of goodness.
Just as those who will reign with Christ will have no remnants of a bad will, so those assigned to the punishment of eternal fire with the devil and his angels will have no rest and will never be able to have a good will.
Just as the co-heirs with Christ will be given the perfection of grace for eternal glory, so the companions of the devil will have their punishment increased by their own wickedness when, assigned to outer darkness, they will not be illuminated by any inner light of truth.
The keys of Peter.
Therefore, repentance can be useful to every person in this life, whenever they do it, no matter how wicked or old they are.
If they renounce their past sins with all their heart, shed not only bodily but also heartfelt tears before God, and strive to cleanse the stains of their evil deeds with good works, they will immediately receive forgiveness for all their sins.
The Lord promises us this through the prophetic word, saying: "If you return and groan, you will be saved" (Isaiah 30:15, according to the Septuagint).
And in another place it says: "My son, if you have sinned, do not add to your sins, but also pray for your past sins, that they may be forgiven you" (Sirach 21:1).
Prayer for sins would never have been commanded if forgiveness were not granted to those who pray.
But repentance benefits the sinner only if it is done in the Catholic Church, to which God granted the power of binding and loosing in the person of blessed Peter, saying: "Whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matthew 16:19).
Therefore, whenever a person truly repents of their sins and corrects their life with God's enlightenment, they will not be deprived of the gift of forgiveness, because God, as He says through the prophet, does not desire the death of the dying.
But rather so that he may turn from his evil ways and live, says the Lord Almighty.
However, no one should stay in their sins under the hope of God's mercy, just as no one would want to stay sick hoping for future health.
Those who neglect to turn away from their wrongdoings and promise themselves that God will forgive them may sometimes be overtaken by God's sudden wrath, finding neither time for conversion nor the benefit of forgiveness.
Therefore, Sacred Scripture kindly warns each of us saying, "Do not delay in turning to God, and do not put it off day by day; for suddenly his wrath will come, and in the time of vengeance, he will destroy you."
Also, blessed David says, "Today if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts."
Similarly, blessed Paul agrees with these words, "See to it, brothers, that none of you has a sinful, unbelieving heart that turns away from the living God. But encourage one another daily, as long as it is called 'Today,' so that none of you may be hardened by sin's deceitfulness."
Thus, a hardened heart lives either by not converting, despairing of the forgiveness of their sins, or by hoping for God's mercy but remaining in the perversity of their sins until the end of this life.
Sin against the Holy Spirit.
Therefore, loving God's mercy and fearing His justice, let us neither despair of the forgiveness of sins nor remain in our sins, knowing that the fairness of the most just judge will demand all debts that the mercy of the most merciful Redeemer has not forgiven.
Just as mercy receives and absolves those who convert, so too will justice repel and punish the hardened.
These are the ones who sin against the Holy Spirit and will not receive forgiveness in this age or the next.
Indeed, the human soul is an intellectual spirit, designed to seek, recognize, and discern the time of its actions, for which it will receive what divine justice has ordained in judgment, and the time of that retribution, during which it will not be possible to change actions or usefully request the forgiveness of sins from divine mercy.
Other spirits of all animals, which do not have intellect, originate either from the earth or from the waters (for reptiles and birds come from the waters, while some creatures that crawl and some that walk come from the earth), and they are spirits as long as they live in their bodies.
A soul that has not been made capable of reason by divine will begins and ends its life with its flesh: because when it does not give life to the body, it does not live itself.
Thus, in a miraculous way, while the soul is the cause of life for all flesh, an irrational spirit lives only as long as it can remain in the flesh and is extinguished when separated from its flesh.
Thus, while it is the life of its flesh, it cannot live when it stops giving life to the flesh; and if there is no flesh to which it can give life, it will also immediately lose that life.
Therefore, eternity is not given to irrational spirits, nor is any judgment prepared for them, in which they would be rewarded with happiness for good deeds or punished for bad deeds.
This is because no distinction of actions is required in them, as they have not received any capacity for understanding from the divine.
Therefore, their bodies will not be resurrected because there was neither equity nor inequity in their souls, for which they would be rewarded with eternal happiness or punishment.
Thus, these animals carry out the course and adornment of the present age according to the incomprehensible will of the Creator.
From their deeds, they will give no account, because they are not rational beings.
For does God care about oxen? (I Cor. V, 10).
But humans, because they are rational, will give an account to God for themselves and for all the things they have used in this present life.
And based on the quality of their actions, they will receive either punishment or glory.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each may receive according to what they have done in the body, whether good or bad (II Cor. V, 10).
That is, when according to the word of our Creator and Redeemer: All who are in the graves will hear his voice and come out—those who have done good will rise to live, and those who have done evil will rise to be condemned (John V, 28, 29).
So that those who have done evil will go into eternal fire, always burning with the devil, the prince of all evil, while those who have done good will go into eternal life, reigning forever with Christ, the King of all ages.
They will reign with Christ, whom God has predestined to the kingdom by His free goodness.
For He prepared them by predestination to be worthy of the kingdom, calling them according to His purpose to obey.
He prepared them to be justified, so that by receiving grace, they would believe rightly and live well.
He also prepared them to be glorified, so that, being made co-heirs with Christ, they would possess the kingdom of heaven forever.
Baptism should not be repeated.
To this kingdom, at different times, they have arrived through the sacraments that Christ instituted for the faith in His incarnation, whom God saved freely without any preceding merit of good will or good works.
As from that time when our Savior said: Unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God (John III, 5), no one can receive the kingdom of heaven or eternal life without the sacrament of baptism, except for those who in the Catholic Church shed their blood for Christ without baptism.
For whether in the Catholic faith, heresy, or schism, anyone receives the sacrament of baptism in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, they receive the entire sacrament; but they will not have the salvation, which is the power of the sacrament, if they hold that sacrament outside the Catholic Church.
Therefore, they must return to the Church, not to receive baptism again, which no one should repeat in any baptized person, but to receive eternal life in the Catholic community.
One cannot be suitable to obtain it if they remain alienated from the Catholic Church despite having the sacrament of baptism.
Even if they give large alms and shed their blood for the name of Christ, because they did not maintain the unity of the Catholic Church in this life, they will not have eternal salvation.
Where baptism can benefit someone, alms can also benefit.
Baptism can indeed exist outside the Church, but it cannot benefit unless it is within the Church.
Therefore, only in the Catholic Church can the reception of baptism, works of mercy, and the glorious confession of the name of Christ benefit anyone, provided they live well in the Catholic Church.
For just as without the Catholic Church's community, neither baptism nor works of mercy can benefit anyone, except perhaps to be tortured less, but not to be counted among the children of God; so within the Catholic Church, eternal life is not acquired by baptism alone if one lives poorly after baptism.
For even those who live well must continuously engage in works of mercy, knowing that although their sins are light, they still commit some daily, for which even the saints and the righteous should always say to God in this life: Forgive us our debts.
As we forgive our debtors (Matthew 6:12).
Just as sins often creep into the lives of men through permissible and God-given things, and the more the body is filled with stronger foods, and the human heart is entangled with physical acts and desires, the more frequently guilt is incurred in this mortal life.
43. Abstinence. --- Therefore, humble servants of Christ, who wish to serve their Lord without hindrance and without the distraction of guilt, do not seek marriage at all, and abstain from meat and wine as much as their health allows.
Not because it is a sin to have a spouse or to consume wine and meat: for the blessed Apostle says: "For every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer" (1 Timothy 4:4-5).
God also instituted and blessed marriage at the beginning of humanity (Genesis 2:22).
That is why the Apostle says: "Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled" (Hebrews 13:4).
Therefore, servants of God abstain from meat and wine not because they consider these things unclean, but because they follow the practices of a purer life.
And in not marrying, they do not think marriage is a sin, but they believe that perpetual continence is better than good marriages, especially in this age, when it is said about continence: "He who can accept it, let him accept it" (Matthew 19:12); and about marriage it is said: "But if they cannot exercise self-control, let them marry" (1 Corinthians 7:9).
In one, virtue is encouraged, in the other, weakness is remedied.
Therefore, since illness must always be considered, if someone is first deprived of marriage and then wishes to enter into a second or even a third marriage, they will not have sinned, as long as they keep these marriages pure, meaning that neither the man nor the woman engages with anyone other than their spouse.
In such cases, even if there is some marital excess, as long as it does not violate the lawful bed, it will be a venial sin.
44. The vow of continence. --- But these rules apply to those who have not vowed continence to God.
However, anyone who has castrated themselves for the kingdom of heaven and vowed continence to God in their heart will have condemnation if they are stained by the deadly sin of fornication or if either a man takes a wife or a woman marries, according to the Apostle's judgment (1 Timothy 5:12), because they have broken their first faith.
Therefore, according to the Apostle's judgment (1 Corinthians 7:3), it is right for a husband to give his wife her due, and likewise, the wife should give her husband his due, because if a man marries, he does not sin, and if a virgin marries, she does not sin.
But, according to the same Apostle's words, whoever is determined in his heart and has no necessity but has power over his own will and has vowed continence to God must keep it with all the care of his mind until the end, lest he have condemnation for breaking his first faith.
Similarly, married men or women who have vowed perpetual continence to God by mutual consent should know that they are bound by their vow and no longer owe the debt of physical intimacy, which was once lawful, but owe the continence they vowed to God.
For each will possess the kingdom of heaven, which is promised to the saints, if they forget what is behind and reach forward to what is ahead, as it is said in the Psalms: "Vow, and pay to the Lord your God" (Psalm 76:11), knowing it is lawful and for the advancement of a better life.
Cognize that it pertains, and willingly vow, and quickly repay, and in this act of repaying the vow, always strive to improve with better efforts.
For to everyone who vows to God and repays what they have vowed, God Himself will also grant the promised rewards of the heavenly kingdom.
CAP. IV, or FIRST RULE. Divine Nature.
---45.
So, hold firmly and do not doubt at all that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are naturally one God, in whose name we were baptized.
For while the name Father is one, the name Son is another, and the name Holy Spirit is another, the natural name of these three is God.
As it says in Deuteronomy: "See, see that I am God, and there is no other besides me" (Deut. 32:9); and also, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord your God is one Lord" (Deut. 6:4); and, "You shall worship the Lord your God, and serve Him only" (Deut. 6:13).
CAP. V, or SECOND RULE. One God.
---46.
Hold firmly and do not doubt at all that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, that is, the Holy Trinity, are the only naturally true God.
For while it is not allowed to worship three gods, but only one true God, just as the Father is called the true God, as the Apostle attests, saying, "You turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, and to wait for His Son from heaven, whom He raised from the dead, Jesus" (1 Thess. 1:9); so also the Son is commended as the true God by the Apostle John, saying, "We know that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may know him who is true; and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life" (1 John 5:20).
Since He is the true God, He is also the Truth, as He teaches us saying, "I am the way, the truth, and the life" (John 14:6).
About the Holy Spirit, the Apostle John also says, "The Spirit is the truth" (1 John 5:6).
And indeed, it cannot be that the true God is not naturally the Truth.
The Apostle Paul also confesses Him as God, saying, "Your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God. You are not your own; you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your bodies" (1 Cor. 6:19-20).
CAP. VI, or THIRD RULE. Eternal God.
---47.
Hold firmly and do not doubt at all that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, that is, the Holy Trinity, are one true God without beginning and eternal.
For it is written, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was with God in the beginning" (John 1:1-2).
This eternal existence is also intimated in the Psalm where it says, "God is our King before the ages" (Psalm 74:12); and in another place, "His eternal power and divine nature" (Rom. 1:20).
CAP. VII, or FOURTH RULE. Unchangeable God.
---48.
Hold firmly and do not doubt at all that the Holy Trinity is the only true God, just as eternal, so also naturally unchangeable.
This is signified when He says to His servant Moses, "I am who I am" (Exod. 3:14).
And in the Psalms it says, "In the beginning, Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of your hands. They will perish, but you remain; they will all wear out like a garment. You will roll them up like a robe; like a garment they will be changed. But you remain the same, and your years will never end" (Psalm 102:25-27).
CAP. VIII, or FIFTH RULE. Creator of all things.
---49.
Hold firmly and do not doubt at all that the Holy Trinity is the only true God, the creator of all things, visible and invisible.
As it says in the Psalms, "Blessed is he whose help is the God of Jacob, whose hope is in the Lord his God, who made heaven and earth, the sea" (Psalm 146:5-6).
And everything in them (Ps. 145:5-6).
The Apostle also says about this: Because everything comes from him, through him, and in him; to him be glory forever (Rom. 11:36).
Chapter 9, or Rule 6. The Trinity in Unity.
Hold firmly and never doubt that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are one in nature but three in person.
And that it was the Father alone who said: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased (Matt. 3:17); and the Son alone upon whom that voice of the Father resounded, when the Only Begotten God was baptized in the Jordan according to the flesh, who alone took on flesh;
and the Holy Spirit of the Father and the Son alone, who descended in the form of a dove upon Christ when he was baptized and coming up from the water, and on the fiftieth day after the resurrection, filled the faithful gathered in one place with the division of fiery tongues (Acts 2:3).
That voice, by which the Father alone spoke; and that flesh, by which the Only Begotten God became man alone; and that dove, in whose form the Holy Spirit descended upon Christ; and those fiery tongues, in the division of which he filled the faithful gathered in one place, are the works of the whole Holy Trinity, that is, of one God, who made everything in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible.
Chapter 10, or Rule 7. The Distinction of Persons.
Hold firmly and never doubt that only the Son of God, that is, one person of the Trinity, is the Son of the Father alone;
and that the Holy Spirit, also one person of the Trinity, is not the Spirit of the Father alone, but of both the Father and the Son.
For the Son of God showed that he alone was begotten of the Father when he said: For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son (John 3:16); and shortly after, Whoever does not believe is already judged, because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God (John 3:18).
The Apostle teaches that the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of both the Father and the Son, saying: But you are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you (Rom. 8:9).
And he follows, If anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he does not belong to him (Rom. 8:9).
Chapter 11, or Rule 8. The Holy Spirit.
Hold firmly and never doubt that the same Holy Spirit, who is the one Spirit of the Father and the Son, proceeds from both the Father and the Son.
For the Son says: When the Spirit of truth comes, who proceeds from the Father (John 15:26); where he taught that it is his Spirit, because he is the Truth (John 14:6).
The prophetic and apostolic teachings also commend to us that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son.
For Isaiah says of the Son: He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he will slay the wicked (Isaiah 11:4).
The Apostle also says: Whom the Lord Jesus will kill with the breath of his mouth (2 Thess. 2:8).
The only Son of God also signifies that the breath of his mouth is the Spirit, when after his resurrection he breathed on the disciples and said: Receive the Holy Spirit (John 20:22).
John also says in the Apocalypse about the mouth of the Lord Jesus: Out of his mouth came a sharp, two-edged sword (Rev. 1:16).
Therefore, the breath of his mouth is the sword that comes out of his mouth.
Chapter 12, or Rule 9. The Trinity is Boundless.
Hold firmly and never doubt that the Trinity is God, infinite in power, not in size, and that every spiritual and bodily creature is contained by his power and presence.
For God the Father says: I fill heaven and earth (Jer. 23:24).
It is also said of the Wisdom of God, which is his Son, that it reaches from one end to the other mightily and orders all things gently (Wis. 8:1).
We also read of the Holy Spirit: The Spirit of the Lord has filled the whole world (Wis. 1:7).
And the prophet David says: Where can I go from your Spirit? Or where can I flee from your presence? If I go up to heaven, you are there (Ps. 139:7-8).
If I go down to hell, you are there (Psalm 138:7).
Chapter 13, or Rule 10. The Person of the Son.
Hold firmly and do not doubt that one of the persons of the Trinity, that is, God the Son, who alone is born of the nature of God the Father and is of the same nature with the Father, was conceived in the Virgin and born of the Virgin in the fullness of time, taking on the form of a servant willingly, the Word made flesh.
This same one, born essentially of the Father, was also conceived and born essentially of the Virgin.
He is one and of the same nature with the Father, and of the same nature with the Virgin.
As He says about God the Father: "From eternity, he established me, and from the beginning, before the hills, I was brought forth" (Proverbs 8:22, 26);
and as the Apostle says, "When the fullness of time had come, God sent forth his Son, born of a woman, born under the law" (Galatians 4:4).
Chapter 14, or Rule 11. The Humanity of Christ.
Hold firmly and do not doubt that Christ, the Son of God, as He is full and perfect God from God the Father, so He is full and perfect man from the Virgin Mother, that is, the Word God, having true flesh of our kind without sin and a rational soul.
This the Son of God clearly showed when He said about His flesh: "Touch and see, because a spirit does not have flesh and bones as you see I have" (Luke 24:39).
He also showed He has a soul when He said, "For this reason, the Father loves me, because I lay down my soul and take it up again" (John 10:17).
He showed He has the understanding of a soul when He said: "Learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart" (Matthew 11:29).
And about Him, God says through the prophet: "Behold, my servant will understand, he will be exalted and very high" (Isaiah 52:13).
For blessed Peter, according to the prophecy of holy David, acknowledges flesh and soul in Christ.
Speaking about blessed David, he said, "Since he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn to him with an oath that one of his descendants would sit on his throne, he foresaw and spoke about the resurrection of Christ, that neither was his soul abandoned in hell, nor did his flesh see corruption" (Acts 2:30, 31).
Chapter 15, or Rule 12. The Divinity of Christ.
Hold firmly and do not doubt that the same is the Word of God, who, with God the Father and the Holy Spirit, made all times and gave the law to Moses on Mount Sinai, ordered through angels (Galatians 3:19), and the same Word of God became flesh.
When the fullness of time had come, sent by the Father and the Holy Spirit, He alone was made from the woman He created, He alone was made under the law He gave (Galatians 4:4).
Chapter 16, or Rule 13. About the two natures in Christ.
Hold firmly and do not doubt that the Word of God, which became flesh, has two natures that remain unconfused and inseparable: one true divine nature, which He has in common with the Father, according to which He says: "I and the Father are one" (John 10:30); and, "Whoever has seen me has seen the Father" (John 14:9); and, "I am in the Father, and the Father is in me" (John 14:10); according to which the Apostle says about Him, "He is the radiance of the glory" (Hebrews 1:3).
And the form of the substance of God; the other true human form, according to which the incarnate God himself says, "The Father is greater than I" (John 14:28).
Chapter 17, or Rule 14. The Unity of the Person in Christ.
58. Hold firmly, and do not doubt at all, that the Word of God made flesh has one person of his divinity and flesh.
For God the Word truly deigned to unite full human nature to himself, and with his divinity remaining, the Word was made flesh in such a way that, although naturally the Word is not the same as the flesh, because the truth of the two natures remains in Christ, yet according to one person, the same Word became flesh from the beginning of the maternal conception.
For God the Word did not take on the person of a man, but the nature; and in the eternal person of the divinity, he took on the temporal substance of flesh.
Therefore, Christ is one, the Word made flesh (John 1:14), who is from the fathers according to the flesh, and above all, God blessed forever (Romans 9:5).
One Jesus, to whom the Father also says: "From the womb before the morning star I have begotten you" (Psalm 110:3): where the eternal birth without beginning before all time is signified;
of whom the evangelist also says, "his name was called Jesus, which was so named by the angel before he was conceived in the womb" (Luke 2:21).
Chapter 18, or Rule 15. The Union of the Word and Flesh.
59. Hold firmly, and do not doubt at all, that the flesh of Christ was not conceived in the womb of the Virgin without divinity, before it was assumed by the Word; but the Word of God, by taking on his flesh, was conceived, and the flesh itself was conceived by the incarnation of the Word (III Sent., dist. 2, cap. Si autem).
Chapter 19, or Rule 16. Sacrifices. The Sacrifice of Bread and Wine.
60. Hold firmly, and do not doubt at all, that the only begotten God the Word made flesh offered himself as a sacrifice and offering to God for us in a fragrant aroma (Ephesians 5:2): to whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, animals were sacrificed by patriarchs, prophets, and priests during the time of the Old Testament;
and to whom now, that is, in the time of the New Testament, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, with whom he shares one divinity, the holy Catholic Church throughout the whole world does not cease to offer the sacrifice of bread and wine in faith and love.
For in those carnal sacrifices, there was a representation of the flesh of Christ, which he was to offer without sin for our sins, and of the blood which he was to shed for the remission of our sins:
but in this sacrifice, there is thanksgiving and commemoration of the flesh of Christ, which he offered for us, and of the blood which the same God shed for us.
Of which, the blessed Paul says in the Acts of the Apostles: "Take heed to yourselves and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the Church of God, which he purchased with his own blood" (Acts 20:28).
Therefore, in those sacrifices, it was figuratively signified what was to be given to us; but in this sacrifice, it is clearly shown what has already been given to us.
In those sacrifices, the Son of God was foretold to be slain for the ungodly: but in this sacrifice, he is proclaimed to have been slain for the ungodly, as the Apostle testifies, "For while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly" (Romans 5:6), and "while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son" (Romans 5:10).
Chapter 20, or Rule 17. The Humanity of Christ.
61. Hold firmly, and do not doubt at all, that the Word made flesh always truly has the same human flesh by which the Word God was born of the Virgin, by which he was crucified and died, by which he rose again and ascended into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God, and by which he will also come to judge the living and the dead.
For this reason, the apostles heard from the angels: "He will come in the same way as you saw him go into heaven" (Acts 1:11); and the blessed John says, "Behold, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, even those who pierced him, and all the tribes of the earth will see him" (Revelation 1:7).
One, whom they obviously despised.
In other respects, these are not added.
(Apoc. I, 7).
Chapter XXI, or Rule XVIII.
Nature is nothing but good.
Hold firmly, and do not doubt, that the Trinity, that is, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, is naturally the highest and unchangeable good.
All natures were created by Him, and they are good because they were made by the highest good;
but they are changeable because they were made from nothing.
There is no nature of evil, because every nature, as far as it is nature, is good.
But because good can be increased or diminished in it, it is called evil to the extent that its good is diminished.
Evil is nothing else but the absence of good.
Thus, it is clear that rational creatures have a twofold evil:
one by which they voluntarily fell from their highest good, their creator, and the other by which they will be punished against their will with the eternal fire's punishment.
They will suffer the latter justly because they committed the former unjustly;
and because they did not keep the order of divine institution, they will not escape the order of divine retribution.
Chapter XXII, or Rule XIX.
No creature is the same as God.
Hold firmly, and do not doubt, that neither the angels nor any other creature is of the same nature as the highest Trinity, which is naturally one God: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
For those who made and those who were made could not be of one nature.
Chapter XXIII, or Rule XX.
Angels made stable.
Hold firmly, and do not doubt, that every creature, naturally changeable, was made by the unchangeable God.
However, none of the holy angels can now be changed for the worse because they have received eternal happiness, which they enjoy steadfastly with God and cannot lose.
But this ability to not be changed for the worse from the state of happiness in which they are, was not naturally instilled in them but was given by the bounty of divine grace after they were created.
If the angels had been made naturally unchangeable, the devil and his angels would never have fallen from their company.
Chapter XXIV, or Rule XXI.
Rational creatures.
Hold firmly, and do not doubt, that in all creatures, which the highest Trinity made both spiritual and bodily, only angelic and human spirits received the ability to understand by divine gift.
Other spirits of brute animals did not receive reason and intelligence, and they cannot have it at all.
Thus, it is said to humans: "Do not be like the horse or mule, which have no understanding" (Psalm 32:9);
and therefore, the souls of humans and the souls of animals are not of the same nature;
neither can the souls of animals pass into humans, nor the souls of humans into animals.
Chapter XXV, or Rule XXII.
Adam's free will.
Hold firmly, and do not doubt, that the first humans, that is, Adam and his wife, were created good, upright, and without sin, with free will, by which they could, if they wished, always serve and obey God with humble and good will;
and by this free will, they could, if they wished, sin by their own will;
and they sinned not by necessity, but by their own will;
and by that sin, human nature was changed for the worse, so that not only did death reign through sin in those first humans, but the dominion of sin and death also passed into all humans.
Chapter XXVI, or Rule XXIII.
Original sin.
Hold firmly, and do not doubt, that every person conceived by the union of a man and woman is born with original sin, subject to impiety and death, and thus is born a child of wrath.
The Apostle says about this: "We were indeed...
By nature, we are children of wrath, just like everyone else (Ephesians 2:3). No one is freed from this wrath except through faith in the mediator between God and humans, Jesus Christ, who was conceived without sin, born without sin, died without sin, and became sin for us, meaning He became a sacrifice for our sins. In the Old Testament, the sacrifices offered for sins were referred to as sins themselves. All of these sacrifices symbolized Christ, for He is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world (John 1:29).
Chapter 27, or Rule 24. The punishment of the unbaptized. 68. Hold this firmly and do not doubt at all that not only adults who are capable of reason but also infants, whether they begin to live in their mothers' wombs and die there, or are born from their mothers and die without the sacrament of holy baptism, which is given in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, will be punished with everlasting torment in eternal fire. For even if they have committed no personal sin, they have inherited the condemnation of original sin through their carnal conception and birth.
Chapter 28, or Rule 25. The Judgment. 69. Hold this firmly and do not doubt at all that Christ, the Son of God, will come to judge the living and the dead, and He will raise and glorify those whom He has justified by the gift of His grace through faith, granting perseverance in the faith and love of the holy mother Church until the end. At His coming, He will make them equal to the holy angels, according to His promise, and bring them to a state where they will be perfectly good, to the extent that God grants each one, and they will no longer be able to change from this perfection. There will be different glories among the saints, but they will all share the same eternal life. The devil and his angels will be thrown into eternal fire by Christ, where they will never be free from the punishment prepared for them by divine justice. Along with the devil, wicked and unrighteous humans, who are described in Scripture as following him because they imitated his evil works and did not repent appropriately before the end of their present life, will also burn in the eternal fire with their resurrected bodies.
Chapter 29, or Rule 26. The Resurrection of the Flesh. 70. Hold this firmly and do not doubt at all that the resurrection of the flesh will be common to all people, both good and bad, at the coming of the Lord. However, the reward for the good and the punishment for the bad will be different according to God's justice. The Apostle says that we will all rise, but we will not all be changed (1 Corinthians 15:51). The righteous will be changed and will enter into eternal life. The Apostle shows this by saying, "The dead will be raised incorruptible, and we will be changed" (1 Corinthians 15:52). And he explains what this change will be by adding, "For this perishable must put on the imperishable, and this mortal must put on immortality" (1 Corinthians 15:53). In the bodies of the righteous, the Apostle's words will come true: "It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption. It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power. It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body" (1 Corinthians 15:42 and following). He called it a spiritual body not because it will be a spirit, but because it will remain immortal and incorruptible through the life-giving spirit. Thus, it will be called a spiritual body then, not because it is a spirit, but because it remains a body. Just as now it is called a natural body, although it is found not to be a soul, but a body.
Chapter 30, or Rule 27. Faith and Baptism. 71. Hold this firmly and do not doubt at all that, except for those who are baptized in their own blood for the name of Christ, no one will receive eternal life without here being converted from their sins through repentance and faith, and being freed through the sacrament of faith and repentance, that is, through baptism. For adults, it is necessary to repent of their sins, to hold the Catholic faith according to the rule of truth, and to receive the sacrament of baptism.
But as for those who cannot believe by their own will, nor do penance for the sin they inherit from their origin, the sacrament of faith and penance, which is holy baptism, suffices for salvation as long as they are not capable of reason.
Chapter 31, or Rule 28. Grace.
Firmly hold, and do not doubt at all, that no one here can do penance unless God has enlightened them and converted them by His free mercy.
For the Apostle says: "In the hope that God will grant them repentance leading to a knowledge of the truth, and they will come to their senses and escape from the trap of the devil" (2 Timothy 2:25).
Chapter 32, or Rule 29. Nothing is done without grace.
Firmly hold, and do not doubt at all, that a person, whom neither ignorance of letters nor any infirmity or adversity prevents, can indeed read the words of the holy law and the Gospel, or hear them from the mouth of any preacher.
But no one can obey the divine commandments unless God has first given them grace, so that what they hear with their body, they also perceive with their heart, and, having received good will and strength from God, they both want to and can follow God's commandments.
For neither the one who plants nor the one who waters is anything, but only God who makes things grow (1 Corinthians 3:7): who also works in us to will and to act in order to fulfill His good purpose (Philippians 2:13).
Chapter 33, or Rule 30. Nothing is hidden from God.
Firmly hold, and do not doubt at all, that to the immutable God, not only past and present things, but also all future things, are most well known.
To whom it is said: "God, who knows what is hidden, who knows all things before they happen" (Daniel 13:42).
Chapter 34, or Rule 31. Predestination.
Firmly hold, and do not doubt at all, that the immutable God, the Trinity, the most certain knower of all things and works, both His own and human, knows before all ages to whom He would grant grace through faith.
Without which no one could be freed from the guilt of sin, both original and actual, from the beginning of the world to the end.
For those whom God foreknew and predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son (Romans 8:29).
Chapter 35, or Rule 32. The blessed by predestination.
Firmly hold, and do not doubt at all, that all whom God, by His free goodness, makes vessels of mercy, were predestined by God for adoption as His children before the foundation of the world.
Nor can any of those whom God has predestined to the kingdom of heaven perish, nor can any of those whom God has not predestined to life be saved by any means.
For predestination is the preparation of the grace by which the Apostle says we are predestined for adoption as His children through Jesus Christ (Ephesians 1:5).
Chapter 36, or Rule 33. Baptism.
Firmly hold, and do not doubt at all, that the sacrament of baptism can exist not only within the Catholic Church but also among heretics who baptize in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
But it cannot benefit those outside the Catholic Church.
Indeed, just as within the Church, it confers salvation through the sacrament of baptism to those who believe rightly, so outside the Church, the same baptism brings destruction to those baptized if they do not return to the Church.
The unity of ecclesiastical society is so important for salvation that baptism cannot save if it is not administered where it ought to be given.
However, baptism remains in a person even if baptized outside the Church, but it is present for judgment if they are separated from the Church.
And because it is clear that wherever it is given, this baptism is to be given once, therefore, if it has been given by heretics in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, it is to be reverently acknowledged and not repeated.
For the Savior says: He who has bathed only needs to wash his feet (John 13:10).
Chapter 37, or Rule 34. No salvation outside the Church.
Firmly believe, and never doubt, that anyone baptized outside the Catholic Church cannot attain eternal life unless they return to and join the Catholic Church before the end of their life.
For the Apostle says, if I have all faith and know all mysteries, but do not have love, I am nothing (1 Corinthians 13:2).
And in the days of the flood, we read that no one could be saved outside the ark.
Chapter 38, or Rule 35. The damned.
Firmly believe, and never doubt, that not only all pagans but also all Jews, and all heretics and schismatics who end their lives outside the present Catholic Church, will go into eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his angels (Matthew 25:41).
Chapter 39, or Rule 36. Heretics.
Firmly believe, and never doubt, that any heretic or schismatic baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, if not joined to the Catholic Church, no matter how many alms they give, or even if they shed their blood for Christ, cannot be saved.
For any person who does not hold to the unity of the Catholic Church, neither baptism, nor any amount of alms, nor a death suffered for Christ's name, can benefit them for salvation as long as they persist in heretical or schismatic wickedness which leads to death.
Chapter 40, or Rule 37. Christians living badly.
Firmly believe, and never doubt, that not all who are baptized within the Catholic Church will receive eternal life, but only those who live rightly after receiving baptism, that is, those who abstain from vices and carnal desires.
For just as unbelievers, heretics, and schismatics will not inherit the kingdom of heaven, neither will sinful Catholics.
Chapter 41, or Rule 38. No one lives without sin.
Firmly believe, and never doubt, that even just and holy people, except for those baptized as infants, cannot live without sin here.
And that it is always necessary for every person to atone for their sins with alms, fasting, prayer, or tears until the end of this life, and to humbly and truly ask for forgiveness from God.
Chapter 42, or Rule 39. Food and drink. Marriage, second marriages allowed.
Firmly believe, and never doubt, that every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving.
And that God's servants who abstain from meat or wine do not reject them as unclean things made by God, but abstain from them as stronger food and drink solely for the discipline of the body.
Marriage is also divinely instituted and blessed; and it is better for someone to be without a spouse to think more freely and fully about the things of God, how to please God (1 Corinthians 7:34); but for those who have not vowed chastity, there is no sin if a woman marries or a man takes a wife.
Not only are first marriages instituted by God, but also second and third marriages are allowed for those who cannot remain chaste.
However, for those who have vowed chastity to God, whether married or free from marriage, it is very wrong if they desire marital relations, which they declared they would not pursue, or return to those from which they declared they would withdraw, in their voluntary and mutual commitment.
Chapter 43, or Rule 40. The wicked mixed with the good in the Church.
Firmly believe, and never doubt, that the Catholic Church is God's threshing floor, and within it, until the end of the world, the chaff is mixed with the wheat, that is, the wicked are mixed with the good in the communion of sacraments; and in every profession, whether of clerics, monks, or laypeople, there are both good and wicked people; and the good are not harmed by the wicked.
We should not abandon them, but rather tolerate the bad among the good, as much as faith and charity demand, meaning if they sow no seeds of treachery in the Church or lead brothers to any evil deed by deadly example.
No one within the Catholic Church who believes rightly and lives well can be stained by another's sin, if they neither consent to nor support the sinner; it's beneficial to tolerate the bad among the good within the Church, if this is done by living well and giving good counsel, so that seeing and hearing what is good, they reject their own evil and tremble at being judged by God for their bad deeds.
Thus, with the gift of grace coming first, they become ashamed of their iniquities and turn to a good life through God's mercy.
The good among the bad within the Catholic Church should only be separated by the difference in their deeds, so that those who share in the divine sacraments with them do not share in their evil works.
At the end of the world, the good will be separated even physically from the bad, when Christ comes with his winnowing fork in his hand and cleanses his threshing floor, gathering his wheat into the barn and burning the chaff with unquenchable fire (Matthew 3:12); when through just judgment he separates the righteous from the unjust, the good from the bad, the upright from the perverse: he will place the good on his right and the bad on his left, and from the mouth of his righteous and eternal judgment, as pronounced with everlasting and unchangeable sentence, all the wicked will go into eternal fire, but the righteous into eternal life (Matthew 25:45): the wicked always burning with the devil, but the righteous reigning forever with Christ.
Chapter 44. Persisting in faith.
85. For now, believe faithfully, hold strongly, and defend truly and patiently these forty chapters, which firmly pertain to the rule of true faith.
If you know anyone teaching contrary to these, avoid them like a plague, and reject them as a heretic.
For these statements we have set forth conform to the Catholic faith, so that if anyone wishes to contradict not only all but even any single one of them, in that they stubbornly oppose each of these and do not hesitate to teach contrary things, they appear as a heretic and an enemy of the Christian faith, and should be anathematized by all Catholics.
Although the shortness of time and the haste of the messenger has compelled us to omit some things that should have been included for recognizing and avoiding various heresies, yet if you do not neglect to review and thoroughly understand all that is contained in this little work, you will be able, with careful discernment, to judge spiritually about the rest.
For the Apostle says that the spiritual person judges all things (1 Corinthians 2:15): until each of us reaches this point, let us walk in what we have reached, that is, faithfully persevere in what we have surely accepted.
But if he thinks differently about anything, God will reveal this to him as well. Amen.
ADMONITION regarding the following chapter 45.
No one denies that the following chapter did not truly come from Fulgentius, but was appended to this completed work by some other unknown author, if one reads the whole book of Fulgentius and pays even moderate attention to the final words of the last chapter.
For after proposing 40 chapters, or rather rules of true faith, he says that the shortness of time and the haste of the messenger compelled him to omit in silence some things that should have been included otherwise.
Hence, it is not likely that he (adding moreover the clear conclusion of the whole work) would have increased the already completed work with this longer chapter, which contributes nothing, or nearly nothing, to the matter at hand, or would have repeated the sufficiently brief rules in a shorter speech.
Furthermore, even if these reasons were not enough to prevent us from attributing this chapter to Fulgentius, all the manuscripts we have seen—four from the Vatican, two from England, and one very old from Corbie, written in a script that suggests it is a thousand years old or more, almost from the time of Fulgentius or shortly thereafter—all of these manuscripts include everything which in this chapter...
Oh, the chapter is read from the beginning, and it ends with these words, "God will reveal this to him too. Amen," written by the same hand, Fulgentius, Bishop of the holy Catholic Church of Ruspe. The Book on the Rule of True Faith ends.
However, because it was a matter of religion to not exclude anything previously published here, it seemed appropriate to attach this entire chapter to this work as a unique appendix.
1. The true foundation of faith is fundamentally to believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are naturally one God, such that we believe the only-begotten Son is truly born of the Father, and the Holy Spirit truly and naturally proceeds from both the Father and the Son, and that the Holy Trinity is one, true, eternal, and unchangeable God.
It is also fitting for salvation to believe that one person of the Trinity, that is, the only-begotten God, was made man solely for our salvation; and that he is truly one true God and one true man, having one nature with the Father and the Holy Spirit according to divinity; and according to humanity, Christ's rational soul is of the same nature as the souls of all humans, and Christ's flesh is of the same nature as that of all who descend from the first man.
Thus, neither Christ's soul nor his flesh is of the same nature as his divinity because he was truly created according to humanity; but just as his divine nature is common to the Father and the Holy Spirit, so his soul and body naturally share with our souls and bodies.
By his divinity, he has freed the flesh and soul of believers in him from the dominion of sin and the punishment of eternal death by removing sin.
2. Armed with this belief, you will not forget to pray day and night for divine mercy, pleading for the blessed hope of all who believe in him, who is Christ the Lord, that you may firmly hold and faithfully keep the truth of this faith: for the Holy Spirit abundantly provides help to those who faithfully pray, as the prophet says, "The Lord is near to all who call on him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of those who fear him, he will hear their cries and save them. The Lord watches over all who love him, but all the wicked he will destroy" (Psalm 145:18-20).
And again, he says to God, "See, those who are far from you will perish; you destroy all who are unfaithful to you" (Psalm 73:27).
As for himself, he says, "But as for me, it is good to be near God; I have made the Lord my refuge" (Psalm 73:28).
3. Therefore, adhere to God, dearest son, and place your hope in him with all your heart, faith, and love.
In the service of the world, offer faithful service to the earthly king because God loves this, and the Apostle commands it.
But in the matter of faith, by which Christ redeemed us with his blood, let all fear depart from our hearts.
We owe our souls to him whose blood redeemed us.
We must love him above all whom we know as the most merciful Redeemer of our souls.
We must fear his eternal and true power above all, whom we hope will come as the most just judge.
We must seek his promises with all the affection of our hearts, who can grant eternal life to both soul and body.
We must fear his wrath, who can cast both soul and body into hell: in whose judgment, without favoritism, without ambition of powers, masters and servants, kings and soldiers, rich and poor, humble and exalted will be judged equally; where any servant who has held the faith of God in truth will inherit the eternal kingdom, but the unfaithful master will be burned in eternal fire; where the life of faithful servants and masters will neither end nor will their joy cease, but the unfaithful, whether servants or masters, according to the prophetic word, "Their fire will not be quenched, and their worm will not die" (Isaiah 66:24).
The wicked will go into eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.
4. Let us pay attention to those whom the Savior predicted would go there, namely those to whom he will say, "I was hungry, and you did not give me anything to eat; I was thirsty, and you did not give me anything to drink; I was naked, and you did not clothe me."
You didn't clothe me.
I was a stranger, and you didn't welcome me.
I was sick and in prison, and you didn't visit me.
Matth. 25:42
If someone is rightly thrown into eternal fire for not giving bread to Christ in his hungry followers, what will happen to those who deny themselves the bread that came down from heaven through their lack of faith?
If someone is burned in everlasting flames for not giving a cup of cold water to Christ in his thirsty followers, what will happen to those who, having been reborn from water and the Holy Spirit, allow themselves to re-baptize with the holy baptism they received once for salvation and the sacrament of holy regeneration?
If we believe that those who neglect to show hospitality to Christ in his foreign followers are subjected to eternal torment, what will happen to those who exclude the Lord Christ from their hearts, welcome the devil with blind faith, and leave the holy Church, which is the pillar and foundation of truth I Tim. 3:15, surrounded by heretical falsehoods?
If someone who does not visit Christ's followers who are sick and in prison is assigned to eternal fire, what should we say about those who violently afflict God's followers, persecuting them solely for their faith, either by the filth of prisons or the exile of deportation?
But in all these things, although the faithless may rage, God still provides help to His own.
And while the enemies of faith desire to corrupt anyone through cunning seduction or violent compulsion, Christ, who is the power and wisdom of God, grants strength to despise the promises of deadly persuasion and to oppose human terrors with the strength of divine fear.
The only requirement is that the will does not turn away from God, and thus the reward of faith is attained.
For it is the same faith that either eternal punishment is inflicted for unfaithfulness, or eternal joy is the reward for preserved faith.