Book Against the Superstition of Those Who Believe that Adoration Should Be Given to Pictures and Images of Saints.

The first commandment of the Decalogue is spoken by God:
"I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself a carved image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or that is in the waters under the earth. You shall not bow down to them or serve them."
To these words, blessed Augustine briefly adds, saying (Homily on Exodus, Chapter 1): "In the first commandment, any likeness of God made by human hands is prohibited; not because God does not have an image, but because no image of Him should be worshipped, except that which is Him and none other, and not even that instead of Him, but with Him."
In saying this, blessed Augustine teaches us briefly how we should understand the other commandments of this kind. For when it is distinctly said that no likeness should be made of anything in heaven, or on earth, it is not only understood to mean the likenesses of foreign gods, but also of heavenly creatures, or those that human senses could imagine in honor of the Creator.
For this reason, Moses also speaks clearly to the people, saying: "The Lord spoke to you out of the midst of the fire. You heard the sound of words, but saw no form; there was only a voice."
And a little later: "Therefore, watch yourselves very carefully. Since you saw no form on the day that the Lord spoke to you at Horeb out of the midst of the fire, beware lest you act corruptly by making a carved image for yourselves, in the form of any figure, the likeness of male or female, the likeness of any animal that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flies in the sky, the likeness of anything that creeps on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the waters under the earth. And beware lest you lift up your eyes to heaven, and when you see the sun and the moon and the stars, all the host of heaven, you be drawn away and bow down to them and serve them."

In these words, it's especially important to note that if the works of God's hands are not to be worshipped and honored, then how much more should the works of human hands not be worshipped and honored, even in honor of those whose likenesses they are said to represent.
From the book of Saint Augustine on the City of God, Book 10, Chapter 1, on the ways worship is described: We must see and discuss, as much as God allows, how those who are immortal and blessed in the heavenly seats, having been established as dominions, principalities, and powers—whom these people call gods, and sometimes name as good demons or angels with us—should be believed to desire us to maintain religion and piety.
That is, to speak more clearly, whether it pleases them that we perform sacred rites and sacrifices either to themselves or only to their God, who is also ours, or that we consecrate some of our possessions or ourselves with religious rites. For this is the worship due to divinity, or, to say it more explicitly, deity. Because I couldn't find a sufficient Latin word to signify this in one word, I use the Greek term where necessary to indicate what I mean.
Indeed, our translators have rendered the Greek term "latria," wherever it appears in the Holy Scriptures, as "service." But the service that is due to humans, according to which the Apostle commands servants to be subject to their masters, is usually called by another Greek name. Latria, however, according to the usage of those who composed the divine scriptures for us, is always or almost always used to refer to the service that pertains to worshipping God.
Therefore, if only this kind of worship is mentioned, it does not seem to be owed solely to God. For we are also said to honor men whom we frequent with respectful remembrance or presence. Not only those things to which we subject ourselves with religious humility, but also some things that are subject to us are said to be honored.
For from this word come the terms "farmer" (agricola), "tenant" (colonus), and "inhabitant" (incola).

They call the gods "heaven-dwellers" simply because they inhabit the heavens, not because they worship them, but because they reside there, like settlers of the heavens. Not like settlers who work the land under landowners, but as Virgil says in the Aeneid, Book One, line sixteen:
"An ancient city was there, the settlers from Tyre held it."
He called them settlers because they lived there, not because they farmed. Therefore, cities founded by people from larger cities, like swarms of people, are called colonies. This shows that worship should be given only to God in a specific sense. However, because the term "worship" is used for other things as well, it's impossible to signify the worship due to God with one Latin word.
The word "religion," although it seems to distinctly signify the worship of God (hence our people interpreted it as what is called θρησκεία in Greek), is also used in common Latin for human relationships, affinities, and various obligations. This creates ambiguity when discussing the worship of divinity.
So, we cannot confidently say that religion is solely the worship of God because the word also refers to human relationships. Moreover, "piety" is usually understood as the worship of God, which the Greeks call εὐσέβειαν. However, it is also used to describe dutiful behavior towards parents and acts of mercy.
This likely happened because God especially commands these actions and testifies that they please Him, either as sacrifices or even more than sacrifices. Because of this linguistic custom, God Himself is called pious: which the Greeks never use in their speech, although they use εὐσέβειαν for mercy among their common people.

Therefore, in certain places of Scripture, to make the distinction clearer, they preferred to say θεοσέβειαν, which means "worship of God," rather than εὐσέβειαν, which means "reverence from good worship." However, we cannot express either of these words in a single term.
So, what the Greeks call λατρεία, which is translated into Latin as "service," specifically refers to the kind by which we worship God; or what they call θρησκεία, which in Latin is called "religion," specifically refers to the kind we have towards God. The term θεοσέβειαν, which we can only describe as "worship of God," signifies that this worship is due only to the true God, who makes his worshippers divine.
Therefore, anyone who is immortal and blessed in the heavenly dwellings, if they do not love us and do not wish us to be blessed, should not be worshipped. But if they love us and wish us to be blessed, they surely wish it from the same source as themselves.
In the same book, a little later (Chapter 4): We owe this service, which in Greek is called λατρεία, whether in any sacraments or in ourselves. Indeed, we are all collectively and each individually his temple, because he is pleased to inhabit both the harmony of all and each individual. He is not greater in all than in each one, for he is neither stretched out by mass nor diminished by division.
When we are lifted up to him, our heart is his altar. We please him with his only-begotten Son as the priest. We offer him bloodless sacrifices when we strive for his truth, even to the shedding of blood. We burn the sweetest incense to him when we burn with holy love in his sight.
We vow and return his gifts in us and ourselves to him. We dedicate sacred memory to him in the celebrations of his benefits and on appointed days, lest ungrateful forgetfulness creep in over time. We sacrifice the offering of humility and praise to him on the altar of our heart with the fire of fervent charity.
To see him as he can be seen, and to cling to him, we cleanse ourselves from every stain of sin and evil desires, and we consecrate ourselves in his name. For he is the source of our happiness, and he is the end of all our desires.

Choosing him again, or rather re-choosing, since we had lost him through neglect; by re-choosing him, which is where the term "religion" is derived, we strive towards him with love, so that by reaching him, we may find rest. Hence, we are blessed because we are made perfect by that end.
No other mediator should be sought between God and humans except the one who is both God and human. From Book Nine of Saint Augustine's work (Chapter Fifteen):
The blessed multitude becomes blessed by participating in one God.
By lacking this participation, the miserable multitude of evil angels, which opposes itself as an obstacle rather than aiding beatitude, obstructs the way to reach that blessed state.
To lead us there, we needed not many mediators, but one. This one, by whose participation we are blessed, is the Word of God, not made, but through which all things were made.
However, he is not a mediator because he is the Word; for the immortal and most blessed Word is far from mortal misery. He is a mediator by being human, showing that to reach that blessed and beatific good, it is not necessary to seek other mediators. The blessed and peaceful God, having become a participant in our humanity, provided a way to participate in his divinity.
He does not lead us from mortality and misery to immortal and blessed angels so that by their participation we too might become immortal and blessed, but to that Trinity, by whose participation the angels are also blessed.
Therefore, when he wished to be a mediator in the form of a servant, he became lower than the angels; in the form of God, he remained above the angels: the same one is the way of life below, who is life above.
From Book Ten of the same work, where blessed Augustine most clearly teaches through the example of the Lord Jesus Christ that no creature should be sacrificed to, teaching thus (Chapters...

Some believe that visible sacrifices are appropriate for other gods, while invisible and greater sacrifices are suited for the highest true God, as He is invisible. They think better sacrifices are meant for a better and greater deity, such as the duties of a pure mind and good will. These people are unaware that these are merely signs, just like spoken words are signs of things.
So, just as when we pray and praise, we direct meaningful words to Him, offering the things themselves in our hearts which we signify; similarly, when we sacrifice, we should understand that a visible sacrifice should be offered only to Him, to whom we ourselves should be an invisible sacrifice in our hearts.
Then the angels and higher powers, who are stronger in goodness and piety, favor us, rejoice with us, and help us with their strength to this very end.
But if we wish to offer these to them, they do not accept them willingly; and when they are sent to humans so that their presence is felt, they openly forbid it.
There are examples of this in the holy scriptures.
Some thought that honor should be given to angels, either by worshiping or sacrificing, which is due to God; and they were admonished by them and instructed to offer this to Him alone, to whom they knew it was right to do so.
Holy men of God also imitated the holy angels.
For instance, Paul and Barnabas in Lystra, after performing a miracle of healing, were thought to be gods, and the Lycaonians wanted to offer sacrifices to them; but they humbly rejected this and proclaimed to them the God in whom they should believe.
The deceitful ones arrogantly demand this for themselves only because they know it is due to the true God.
They do not really delight in the smoke of carcasses, as Porphyry and some others think, but in divine honors.
They have plenty of smoke from all around, and if they wanted more, they could provide it for themselves.
Therefore, the spirits who arrogate divinity for themselves do not delight in the smoke of any body, but in the mind of the supplicant, whom they deceive and dominate, blocking the way to the true God, so that man does not become His sacrifice, while sacrifices are made to anyone other than Him.

The true mediator, taking on the form of a servant, became the bridge between God and men, in the person of Christ Jesus. In the form of God, he receives the sacrifice alongside the Father, as they are one God. However, in the form of a servant, he chose to be the sacrifice rather than receiving it, so that no one would think a sacrifice should be offered to any creature.
From Book Ten of the aforementioned work, it states that no creature worshiping God wishes to be worshiped in its place (Chapter Four):
Any immortal power, endowed with whatever might, if it loves us as itself, wants us to be subject to that to which it is also subject so that we may be blessed as it is blessed.
If it does not worship God, it is miserable because it is deprived of God.
Indeed, it supports the divine sentence and favors the strength of love, as it is written: "Whoever sacrifices to gods shall be destroyed, except to the Lord alone."
No person would dare to say that a sacrifice is owed to anyone other than God.
Many acts of divine worship have been wrongly offered to human honors, either due to excessive humility or flattery. Those receiving these honors are considered men, who are worshiped and revered; if much is added, they are even adored.
But who has ever thought that a sacrifice should be offered except to someone believed to be God or made up to be God?
From the book of Saint Augustine on True Religion, about where the true God should primarily be sought (Chapter Fifteen):
We should first follow those who say there is one supreme true God alone who should be worshiped.
If the truth does not shine forth among them, then we must move on.
In the nature of things, the authority of one who unites everything is greater, and among humanity, there is no power in the multitude unless it is in agreement; so in religion, those who call to one should have greater and more trustworthy authority.

From the twenty-fifth homily of Saint Gregory the Pope on the Gospels, on how God should be sought even among the saints:
The watchmen who guard the city find us searching; the holy Fathers, who guard the state of the Church, come to aid our good endeavors with their words or writings to teach us. When we pass by them a little, we find whom we love. Our Redeemer, though He was humble and a man among men, was divine and above men. So when the watchmen are passed by, the beloved is found. We see the prophets and apostles as lower than Him, and we consider Him, who is by nature God, above men.
Referencing the Song of Songs, where it is said from the perspective of the holy Church: "The watchmen who go about the city found me. Have you seen him whom my soul loves? Scarcely had I passed them, when I found him whom my soul loves." Noted briefly in the aforementioned homily, let us now see what the same Father says in the eighteenth book of his explanation on Job about the same words.
He says in Chapter Thirty-Three: When the Church sought its Redeemer, it did not want to place its hope in those ancient preachers, as it says: "Scarcely had I passed them, when I found him whom my soul loves." For it could not have found Him if it had not passed by them.
Blessed Augustine, consistent with this understanding, speaks in the first homily on the Gospel according to John, saying in Tractate One: John is among those mountains, of which we sang a little earlier, saying: "I lift up my eyes to the mountains, from where my help will come." Therefore, dearest brothers, if you want to understand, lift your eyes to this mountain, that is, rise up to the evangelist, rise up to his meaning. But because these mountains receive peace, and one cannot be at peace who places hope in man, do not lift your eyes to the mountain in such a way that you think your hope should be placed in man. Instead, immediately add: "My help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth."

Therefore, let us lift our eyes to the mountains, from where our help will come. However, it is not the mountains themselves where our hope should be placed. For the mountains receive what they minister to you. Thus, the mountains receive where hope should be placed when we lift our eyes to the Scriptures, because the Scriptures were ministered through humans.
We lifted our eyes to the mountains from where help will come. But since the humans who wrote the Scriptures did not shine by themselves (but He was their light who illuminates every person coming into this world; and that mountain was John the Baptist, who said, "I am not the Christ," so that no one placing hope in the mountain would fall from the one who illuminates the mountains. And he himself confessed, saying, "From His fullness we have all received"), you should say: I lifted my eyes to the mountains, from where my help will come.
Do not attribute the help that comes to you to the mountains, but follow and say: My help is from the Lord who made heaven and earth. Therefore, brothers, I have advised you this, so that when you have raised your heart to the Scriptures, when the Gospel sounds: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God," and so on. These were read so that you understand you lifted your eyes to the mountains.
For if they did not say these things, from where would you even think? You would not find it. Therefore, help comes to you from the mountains, so that you may at least hear these things: if you cannot yet understand what you have heard, invoke help from the Lord who made heaven and earth, because the mountains could speak in such a way that they cannot illuminate themselves, because they too were illuminated by hearing.
So, he who said these things received it, that John, brothers, who reclined on the Lord's chest, and drank from the Lord's chest what he would offer to us. But he offered words. You must understand from where he drank, who offered it to you. This same teacher also speaks similarly in the twelfth homily of the aforementioned work, when he treated the words of John the Baptist, who answered his disciples, saying: "A person cannot receive anything unless it is given to them from heaven."

You yourselves bear witness about me when I said:
I am not the Christ.
Why do you deceive yourselves?
How did you ask me this question?
What did you say to me?
Rabbi, the one who was with you across the Jordan, the one you testified about?
Do you know what kind of testimony I gave him now?
I will say that he is not the one I claimed to be, the one who received something from heaven, so that I could be something.
You want me to deny the truth.
A man cannot receive anything unless it has been given to him from heaven.
You yourselves bear witness about me when I said:
I am not the Christ.
You are not the Christ!
But what if he is greater than him, because you baptized him?
I was sent.
I am the herald, he is the judge. Listen to a much stronger, much clearer testimony.
Look at what happens with us.
Look at what we ought to love.
See that loving anyone more than Christ is adultery.
Why do I say this?
Let us heed the voice of John.
He could have been mistaken about him; he could have been thought to be someone he was not:
he rejected false honor to hold on to the solid truth.
Look at what he says about Christ and what he says about himself:
The one who has the bride is the bridegroom.
Be chaste, love the bridegroom.
But who are you? What do you say to us?
The one who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom's voice.
And after a little while, he says:
Look, he is standing firm:
I am not worthy to untie the strap of his sandal.
You humble yourself well, you stand rightly, you do not fall, you hear rightly, and you rejoice greatly because of the bridegroom's voice.
Thus also the Apostle, the friend of the bridegroom, is zealous, and not for himself, but for the bridegroom.
Let him hear the voice of one who is zealous with the zeal of God.
You speak with zeal, not yours, not for you, but with the zeal of God.
From where? How? For whom do you have zeal, for whom are you zealous?
For I have betrothed you to one man, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ.
What then do you fear? Why are you zealous?
I fear, he says, that as the serpent deceived Eve by his craftiness, so your minds may be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.
The whole Church is called a virgin.

You see and rejoice that the members of the Church are different and that they excel in different gifts. Some are married men, some are married women; some are widowers who no longer seek wives; some are widows who no longer seek husbands. Some have preserved their purity from a young age, and some women have vowed their virginity to God.
The gifts are different, but all these people form one virgin. Where is this virginity? It is not in the body. In the body, it is only in a few women. Although virginity can exist in men, it is the sanctity of a few. The integrity of the body is also in the Church, and it is the more honorable member. But there are other members in the body: all of them keep virginity in their minds.
What is the virginity of the mind? It is complete faith, solid hope, and sincere love. This virginity was feared by the one who was jealous that the bridegroom might be corrupted by the serpent. Just as a member of the body can be violated in a specific place, so the seduction of the tongue can violate the virginity of the heart.
From the book "The City of God" by Saint Augustine, Chapter 23: While holy angels and men may be called gods, they can never be called gods of gods, that is, of holy men. From this consideration, it is inferred that if holy angels cannot be called gods of men, much less can men.
Therefore, the same teacher says: However, when we are asked if men have been called gods, meaning they are gods among the people, whom God addresses through angels or through men, we should consider how much more the immortals are worthy of that name. These immortals enjoy the blessedness to which men aspire by worshiping God. What shall we answer, except that it is not in vain that men are expressly called gods in the Holy Scriptures, rather than those immortals and blessed ones, to whom it is promised that we will be equal in the resurrection? This ensures that, because of their excellence, no unbelief might dare to establish any of them as our God.
This is easy to avoid in humans. It should be stated more clearly that men are gods among the people of God, so that they might be certain and confident that He is their God, who is called the God of gods.

Even though they are called immortal gods and blessed ones in heaven, they are not referred to as the gods of gods, meaning the gods of men established among the people of God, to whom it was said: I said: you are gods, and all of you are children of the Most High. Hence, the Apostle says: Even if there are those who are called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, (as there are many gods and many lords), for us, however, there is one God, the Father, from whom all things come, and we exist in Him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things come, and we exist through Him.
Given these circumstances, there is a measure of divine, evangelical, or even human glory, as Alchimus Avitus, the bishop of Vienne, mentions in his Dialogue with King Gundobad: However, that which from the equality of celestial glory, the Father and the Son, excluding the angelic creation in the same way, you illegitimately extend to me a certain envy of the honor conferred upon the heavenly virtues, saying: Therefore, we must also bring glory to the angels, and archangels, and whatever is in the heights; although it may not pertain to the cause, even at present I do not entirely refuse, as if we feared to bring glory to a sublime and excellent creature. For there is a measure of divine, angelic, and even human glory, which we find in many places in Scripture and assigned without fault of flattery to the merits of saints and the insignia of kings. What is the first glory among men? This glory belongs to all His saints. In the Gospel, the Lord says, not even Solomon in all his glory was dressed like a little lily in its natural beauty.
Let's now hear similar thoughts expressed by the blessed Jerome. In his letter to Riparius the priest regarding the schism of Vigilantius, he says: We, however, do not worship or venerate, I do not say the relics of martyrs, but not even the sun and moon, nor angels, nor archangels, nor seraphim, nor cherubim, and any name that is named in the present age, and in the future, lest we serve the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever. We honor the relics of the martyrs, so that we may worship Him whose martyrs they are.

We honor you so that the honors given to the servants may reflect back to the Lord, who said: "Whoever receives you, receives me."
Saint Augustine concurs with this in the first book of The City of God (Chapter 13), saying: "The bodies of the deceased righteous should not be scorned or discarded, as the Holy Spirit used them as instruments and vessels for all good works. If a father's clothes and ring, or anything of that sort, are dearer to his descendants the greater their affection towards him, then the bodies themselves should not be disregarded at all. We carry these bodies much more intimately and closely than any clothing. These bodies pertain not to external adornment or support, but to the very nature of humans. Hence, the funerals of the just of old were attended to with dutiful piety, their obsequies were celebrated, and their burials were provided for. Even while they lived, they instructed their children about burying or even transferring their bodies. The Lord himself, who rose on the third day, praised the good work of the devout woman who poured precious ointment over his body, and commended that it should be preached about, as she did this to prepare him for burial. And those who took his body down from the cross and carefully and honorably buried it are commendably remembered in the Gospel. However, these authorities do not suggest that any sensation remains in the corpses, but indicate that the bodies of the dead belong to God's providence, which favors such acts of piety, to affirm faith in the resurrection."
Likewise, Augustine in the eighth book of the same work (Chapter 27) says: "We do not establish temples, priesthoods, sacred rites, or sacrifices for the martyrs, because their God is our God, not them. We do honor their memories as holy people of God, who fought for the truth until the death of their bodies, to make the true religion known, exposing the false and fictitious. Even if some previously held different views, they were restrained by fear."

Has anyone ever heard of a devoted priest standing at the altar, even over the holy body of a martyr, built for the honor and worship of God, praying, "I offer you this sacrifice, Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian?"
When it is offered to God in their memory, the one who made them both humans and martyrs, and joined them with His holy angels in heavenly honor, we celebrate to give thanks to the true God for their victories and to be inspired to imitate their achievements, seeking His help through the renewal of their memory.
Therefore, any acts of devotion performed at the sites of martyrs are tributes to their memory, not sacred sacrifices to the dead as if they were gods. Even those who bring meals there, though this is not a practice of devout Christians and is uncommon in most areas, pray and then take the meals away to eat or distribute them to the needy, hoping they are sanctified through the martyrs' merits in the name of the Lord of the martyrs.
Anyone who understands the true Christian sacrifice, which is also offered there, knows that these are not sacrifices to the martyrs. We do not honor our martyrs with divine reverence or human transgressions as pagans do for their gods; we do not offer sacrifices to them, nor do we transform their sufferings into sacred rites.
In his book on the work of the six days, "Questions on Genesis, Book One, Chapter Eighty-Four," he mentions that Jacob set up the stone he had used as a pillow and anointed it with oil. This act was not akin to idolatry, as Jacob did not then or later worship or sacrifice to the stone. Instead, it was a prophetic sign related to anointing, from which the name Christ is derived from 'chrism.' Neither stones nor any physical or spiritual creatures should be sacrificed to, and no temple should be built in honor of anyone other than the living God alone.

In various discussions, especially in his debate with Maximus the Manichaean, blessed Augustine makes this point clearly:
"If God were not the Holy Spirit, we would not be His temple. As the Apostle writes: 'Do you not know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?' And again: 'Do you not know that your bodies are the temple of the Holy Spirit, whom you have from God?' Wouldn't we be condemned by the truth of Christ and the Church of God if we made a temple of wood and stones for any exceedingly holy angel, because we would be showing the service that is due only to God to a creature?"
Therefore, as we have shown many times before, God alone is the one in whom we must place our hope for happiness. The same Father suggests this in his book On Christian Doctrine with these words (Book 1, chapters 32, 33):
"Whomever we pity and to whom we give advice, we indeed do it for their benefit, and we consider that. But somehow it also benefits us, as God does not leave unrewarded the mercy we show to the needy. And this supreme reward is that we enjoy Him, and all who enjoy Him also enjoy each other in Him."
If we place our hope for happiness in a man or an angel, we stray from the path. Both a proud man and a proud angel may arrogantly claim this hope for themselves and take pleasure in it.
However, a holy man and a holy angel, even when we are weary and seek rest in them, will refresh us with the sustenance they have received. They will then guide us to God, so that we may be blessed together by enjoying Him.
For the Apostle also exclaims: "Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul? And: Neither he who plants is anything, nor he who waters, but God who gives the increase."
An angel also warns a man who is worshiping him to worship the one under whom he too is a fellow servant.

When you find joy in a person through God, you are essentially finding joy in God rather than the person. This is because it is God who brings you happiness, and you will rejoice in reaching Him, the one you hope to be with. As Paul wrote to Philemon: "Yes, brother," he says, "I will enjoy you in the Lord." If he had not added "in the Lord," and had only said "I will enjoy you," he would have placed his hope of happiness in Philemon.
The fact that only a rational being can achieve happiness, and that this ultimate good comes solely from God, is affirmed by the same teacher in "The City of God," Chapter 12. He states: "The good by which a rational or intellectual creature is happy is nothing but God." Thus, while not every creature can be happy (for example, beasts, trees, and stones cannot attain or grasp this gift), those who can achieve happiness do so not on their own accord but through Him who created them. They find happiness by attaining Him and become miserable by losing Him. However, God, who is inherently happy by His own nature and not by another’s good, cannot be miserable because He cannot lose Himself.
Therefore, we say that the unchangeable good is none other than the one true blessed God. The things He made are certainly good because they come from Him, but they are changeable because they were made not from Him but from nothing. Although they are not the highest good, which is God, they are still great, changeable goods that can cling to the unchangeable good to achieve happiness. Without this connection, they must be miserable.
From the book "On True Religion," Chapter 55: Therefore, let our religion not be the worship of heavenly and celestial bodies, but of Him whose contemplation makes us happy. For we are not made happy by seeing an angel, but by seeing the truth, through which we also love the angels and rejoice with them. We do not envy them because they enjoy this truth more readily and without any troubles hindering them. Instead, we love them more because we too are commanded to hope for something similar from our common Lord. Thus, we honor them with love, not servitude, and we do not build temples for them.

They do not want to be honored by us in this way because they know that when we are good, we become temples of the highest God.
When angels hear, it is God who listens, as if in His true and not man-made temple, just as in all His saints, and His eternal commands are carried out without the need for law.
It should not be surprising that, although He is invisible, it is often recorded that He has appeared visibly to the patriarchs.
Just as a sound that is heard is not the same as the thought set in the silence of understanding, the appearance by which God was seen, though He is inherently invisible, was not His true form.
Nonetheless, He is seen in the same bodily form, just as the thought itself is heard in the sound of a voice.
They did not mistake seeing the invisible God in a bodily form for seeing His true nature.
Moses spoke with the one who was speaking, and yet he said to Him: "If I have found favor in Your sight, show Yourself to me knowingly, so that I may see You."
Additionally, Augustine says in Book Five, Chapter One of "On the Trinity":
"Those things that are said about the unchangeable and invisible nature, the supreme living being, and the self-sufficient one are not to be measured by the standards of visible, changeable, mortal, or needy things."
He says that even in things that are adjacent to our bodily senses, or what we are in our inner person, we strive to understand with knowledge but are not sufficient.
However, faithful piety ardently seeks those things that are above, not inflated by the arrogance of its own strength but enflamed by the grace of the Creator and Savior Himself.
For how can a person comprehend God with the intellect, when he does not yet comprehend his own intellect, by which he wishes to understand?
If he already comprehends this, let him carefully consider that there is nothing better in his nature, and see whether he perceives any outlines of forms, brightness of colors, spacious greatness, distances of parts, distinctions of mass, or any movements through intervals of space in it.

Certainly, we don't find any of these qualities in our intellect, where we grasp wisdom as much as we are capable. Therefore, what we don't find in our better part, we shouldn't seek in something far greater than our better part. Let's understand God this way, if we can, as much as we can:
Great without quantity, creator without need, present without location, containing all things without condition, everywhere whole without place, eternal without time, making changeable things without any change in Himself, and suffering nothing.
Whoever thinks of God this way, even if they can't fully comprehend what He is, still piously avoids, as much as they can, thinking anything about Him that He is not.
How much visible things hinder us from grasping invisible things, and how much the love of physical things, even good ones, hinders us from contemplating spiritual things, the Lord Himself shows by saying:
"I tell you the truth. It is to your advantage that I go away. For if I do not go away, the Advocate will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you" John 16:7.
In these words, the often-mentioned Father Augustine explains this meaning
"It is to your advantage that this form of a servant is taken away from you. Indeed, the Word made flesh lived among you; but I do not want you to love me carnally anymore and, content with this milk, always wish to remain infants.
If I do not withdraw the tender nourishment with which I have fed you, you will not hunger for solid food; if you do not cease to hunger carnally, you will not be capable of the Spirit.
For what does it mean, 'If I do not go away, the Advocate will not come to you'? Could He not send Him while He was here? Who would say that? For neither did He leave that place when the Advocate came.
What does it mean, then, 'If I do not go away, the Advocate will not come to you,' except, 'You cannot receive the Spirit unless you cease to love Christ carnally.'
Hence, the one who had already received the Spirit said: 'Even if we once knew Christ according to the flesh, we know him thus no longer.' For he did not call the flesh of Christ according to the flesh, who spiritually knew the Word made flesh."

This is undoubtedly what the good teacher meant by saying:
If I do not go away, the Comforter will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you.
However, with Christ descending physically, not only the Holy Spirit but also the Father and the Son were present with them spiritually.
Therefore, since they were to become spiritual from being carnal, they would indeed have the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit more fully.
No wise person is ignorant of this: that a faithful person, in order to progress from outer things, must be drawn inward, not thrown outward from inner things, which would cause decline.
One must move from flesh to soul, from body to spirit, from visible things to invisible things, from the world to God.
And this is called progress if someone advances to better things, not worse.
It is better for the soul, worse for the body; higher for the spirit, lower for the flesh, as anyone who reads and understands the words of Saint Augustine knows.
Even fools agree that what human and carnal presumption imagines is much worse than these.
In this category are also found those images called holy, not only by the sacrilegious, because they give divine worship to the works of their hands, but also by the ignorant, attributing holiness to images that are without a soul.
Not only this, but also sanctification, which the Apostle testifies is done through the Word of God, is mindlessly granted to idols that have never spoken.
Finally, Gideon, who, according to the angel, was the strongest of men, and is said to have died in good old age, asked, as the divine Scripture narrates, for golden earrings from the spoils from his companions and received them.
He made an Ephod from them and placed it in his city, Ophrah; and all Israel prostituted themselves by worshiping it there: and it became a ruin to Gideon and his entire household.
Even though he did this in honor of God, because he placed it not in the location chosen by the Lord, but in his own city, which the law certainly forbade, his household did not achieve the elevation he thought but instead experienced downfall.

And to know that this was not done by Gideon for foreign gods, it immediately follows:
But after Gideon died, the children of Israel turned away and prostituted themselves with the Baals.
When they prostituted themselves with the Ephod, it is not said that they turned away, so we understand it was from God; nor is Baals, or Astaroth, or any idol named. But when it mentions foreign gods, Baals are immediately designated, which in Hebrew is a plural term that usually signifies idols in the divine Scriptures.
Just like when the erring people made a single calf in the wilderness, it was said:
These are your gods, Israel, who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
Not only is it wrong to give divine honor to those who should not receive it, but also to ambitiously honor the memories of saints to gain popular glory is reprehensible.
The Lord reproaches the Pharisees about this in the Gospel, as testified by the blessed Jerome, with these words:
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, who build the tombs of the prophets, and decorate the monuments of the righteous, and say:
If we had lived in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partners with them in the blood of the prophets.
Matthew Chapter 23:29-30.
Therefore, the aforementioned doctor uses a very prudent argument, accusing them of being children of murderers, because they build the tombs of the prophets whom their ancestors killed, seeking to appear righteous and glorious in the eyes of the people, and they say:
If we had lived in that time, we would not have done what our fathers did.
Even if they do not say this in words, they speak through their actions, by ambitiously and magnificently building memorials for those who were killed, whom they do not deny were slain by their ancestors.
Indeed, so that no one thinks the testimony of individual saints should be disregarded, I would like to insert here the testimony, not of one man, but of one Church, from which it is clearly evident what was the divine honor and love towards the memories of the saints among the ancient faithful.
Finally, the Church of God, which speaks among Catholics about the passion of Polycarp and other matters concerning the veneration of holy martyrs, says this:
Eusebius, Book 4, Chapter 15.

But that jealous enemy of all good, and adversary of all the just, after seeing that he was crowned both with the glory of martyrdom and the virtues of an outstanding life, and that through death he obtained the rewards of immortality, began to try hard to prevent his remains from being buried by those who desired it.
Therefore, Niceta, the father of Herod and brother of Dalca, was urged to go to the judge to ask him not to allow the body to be buried.
He said, "Lest perhaps, abandoning Him who was crucified, Christians might begin to grieve for this one."
Especially the Jews were plotting these things, who also watched our people closely to prevent them from taking his body from the still-burning flames.
They were miserably ignorant that we can never abandon Christ, who endured death for the salvation of the whole world, nor worship anyone else, since we know the true God and who alone should be worshiped.
We love and venerate the martyrs as the disciples of the Lord, keeping faith with the Master and the Lord, and we wish to be participants in their faith and perseverance in charity.
When the centurion saw the obstinate contention of the Jews, he burned the body placed in the middle.
And so afterward, we collected the burned bones, made more precious than the most valuable gems and more valuable than all gold by fire, and, as was customary, we laid them to rest.
In this place, even now, with the Lord's help, we hold solemn and celebrated gatherings, especially on the day of his passion.
When we celebrate the memories of those who suffered before, we do so to inspire the minds of those who follow with the illustrious examples of their predecessors.
This is taken from the fourth book of Ecclesiastical History, to hold a place among the other authorities of divine law or the holy Fathers.

Since everyone agrees that the worship of religion is owed to God alone, what remains for believers, except to cleanse their minds from all the falsehoods and strive with all their might, so that they may truly say what is written:
"It was not the invention of a man's wicked art that led us into error, nor the labor without fruit of a painted shadow, nor a sculpted image with various colors, whose sight gives desire to the senseless and loves the image of the dead without a soul. Those who love evil are those who have hope in such things, and those who make them, and those who love them, and those who worship them. And again: For no man can shape God to be like himself. For being mortal, you shape a dead thing with unjust hands. He is indeed better than those he worships: for he indeed lived, being mortal, but they never did" (Wisdom of Solomon 15:4 and following).
Someone might say they do not think there is anything divine in the image they worship, but they only venerate it for the honor of the one whose image it is. To this, it is easily answered that if the image they worship is not God, it should not be venerated, even for the honor of the saints, who do not arrogate divine honors to themselves, as shown by many testimonies above.
It is also worth remembering that, according to the eleventh book of the aforementioned histories, after the destruction of the temples and idols in Alexandria, a great zeal for Christianity inflamed those converted from demons to Christ. They painted the sign of the Lord's cross on doorposts, entrances, windows, walls, and columns. Oh, how sincere their religion was! The banner of the cross was painted everywhere, not any likeness of a human face; this was wonderfully arranged by God, possibly without them even knowing. For if those who had abandoned the worship of demons were commanded to venerate the images of saints, it might seem to them that they had not abandoned idols but only changed images.

However, Eusebius of Caesarea illustrates in the seventh book, Chapter 18, of Ecclesiastical History that the images of the apostles and of the Lord Himself were created or preserved by the ancients more out of love and remembrance than religious honor or veneration, unlike the customs of the pagans.
He includes this narration when recounting what he had learned about events in Caesarea Philippi. He says:
"Since we have mentioned this city, it seems only right to recount something that happened there, which we consider worth recording in history. The Gospels tell us that the woman who was suffering from a flow of blood and was healed by the Savior was a citizen of this city; her house is still shown there.
In front of her house, a certain pedestal is displayed in a prominent place, on which the image of the woman kneeling and reaching out her hands in supplication is depicted in bronze. Another bronze statue stands beside her, in the form of a man, gracefully dressed, extending his right hand to the woman.
At the foot of this statue, a certain herb of a new kind grows from the base; when it sprouts, it tends to grow up to the hem of the bronze garment. When the herb touches the hem with its top, it gains the power to cure all diseases and ailments. So, whatever bodily infirmity it may be, it is cured by consuming a small amount of this healing herb, provided it is picked before it grows to touch the top of the bronze hem.
They said that this statue was made to resemble the face of Jesus. It remained until our times, as we ourselves have seen with our own eyes. And it is no wonder if those who believed from among the Gentiles seemed to offer such a gift for the benefits they had received from the Savior; for we see even now images of the apostles Peter and Paul and of the Savior Himself being depicted and painted on panels.
And we have also seen some ancient images of them preserved by certain people."

It seems to me that a custom from pagan times has been somewhat neglected. They honored those they deemed worthy by preserving the insignia of the ancients, which served as a tribute to their memory for future generations. This act signified honor for the past and love for the future. For instance, the chair of James, the first bishop on earth, chosen by the Savior himself and the apostles in Jerusalem, and referred to in the scriptures as the brother of Christ, is still preserved there to this day. All who attain the priesthood of that seat continue to sit in it. Thus far, Eusebius.
Twenty-one. Bede, an Englishman moderately learned in divine literature of his time, commented on the sea made in the temple of the Lord by Solomon. He mentioned, "It should be noted that some believe the law of God prohibits us from carving or painting likenesses of people, animals, or things in the Church or anywhere else; because it is stated in the Decalogue: 'You shall not make for yourself a carved image or any likeness of anything in heaven above, on the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth.'"
They wouldn't hold this belief if they recalled Solomon's work, which included palm trees and cherubim inside the temple, with various engravings, and on the columns, pomegranates and networks, and in the bronze sea, twelve oxen and sculptured figures. Even on the sides of the vessels, there were lions, oxen, palm trees, axles, and wheels, with cherubim and various kinds of pictures. They would also consider the works of Moses, who, by the Lord's command, made cherubim on the mercy seat and later a bronze serpent in the desert, which saved the people from the venom of fiery serpents when they looked at it.

If it was allowed to lift up a bronze serpent on a pole, which the children of Israel looked at and lived, why can't we depict the exaltation of the Lord Savior on the cross, by which He conquered death, to remind the faithful through painting?
Or portray His other miracles and healings, by which He triumphantly overcame the author of death?
Seeing these images often brings deep reflection to viewers, and for those who are illiterate, it can unfold the story of the Lord as if it were a living reading. After all, a painting in Greek is called zo-gra-FEE-a, which means living scripture.
If it was permitted to make twelve bronze oxen that supported the sea and faced the four corners of the world in groups of three, what stops us from depicting the twelve apostles, as they go and baptize all nations in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, as living scripture before everyone's eyes?
If it wasn't against the law to create sculpted images around the same sea measuring ten cubits in circumference, why would it be considered contrary to the law to sculpt or paint the histories of the saints and martyrs of Christ on boards, who, through observing the divine law, deserved to reach the glory of eternal reward?
Indeed, if we carefully consider the words of the law, it becomes clear that making images of things or animals isn't forbidden, but making them for idolatry is entirely prohibited.
Finally, when the Lord was about to say on the holy mountain: You shall not make for yourself a carved image, nor any likeness, He prefaced it with: You shall have no other gods before Me.
Then He added: You shall not make for yourself a carved image, nor any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. And He concluded: You shall not bow down to them nor serve them (Deuteronomy 5:8-9).
These words clearly declare that the forbidden likenesses are those that people make for the worship of foreign gods, which errant paganism has created for worship and adoration.
Otherwise, I believe no part of the divine law simply forbids these images from being made.

Even the Lord, when the Pharisees tested Him about paying tribute to Caesar, where Caesar’s name and image were inscribed, did not respond with: "Give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar, and to God what belongs to God." Instead, He would have corrected their error by saying: "It is not lawful for you to create an image of Caesar on your gold coins, because divine law prohibits such sculpture." He had the perfect opportunity to say this when shown the coin with Caesar's image, which was not formed out of judgment, but rather for idolatry. This should be sufficient from the book of the aforementioned man.
We read in the Acts of the blessed Pope Sylvester the Twenty-Second that Emperor Constantine, not yet reborn at the font of life, upon seeing the faces of the holy apostles Peter and Paul on the tablets shown to him by the aforementioned pope, where the images of both apostles were preserved from ancient memory, recognized and immediately worshipped them, just as they had been shown to him in a nocturnal vision.
But should we worship the image of any saint by this authority of Constantine, especially since the emperor did this more out of the harmful custom of idolatry than from true reasoning, which he had not yet known?
To avoid seeming presumptuous in asserting this, we include the authority of the blessed Ambrose, bishop of Milan, a man exceptional in learning and holiness. In the revelation shown to him of the holy martyrs Gervasius and Protasius, he recounts that the blessed apostle Paul, speaking while those two were silent, recognized them from the memory of their image; yet he does not write, nor even mention the image itself, that he worshipped the present apostle speaking with him in any way.
The blessed Paulinus also sharply rebukes a certain priest through a letter, because he had requested him to send his and his wife’s image so that he could always have those he loved but were absent present in this way.

The blessed Pope Gregory is recorded to have rebuked the bishop of Forojulium for removing images of the apostles from his basilica out of fear that the common people would worship them against the rule of faith. Instead of correcting this error with reasonable authority, he left the paintings intact for the memory of future generations.
Blessed Augustine, in his book "The City of God," Book 10, Chapter 8, said among other things: We read that the deadly bites of serpents were healed by a bronze serpent raised on a pole, as a just punishment for sins, so that the afflicted people might be helped, and death destroyed by death, as a sign of the crucified death. This serpent, preserved for the memory of the event, was later worshipped as an idol by the erring people. King Hezekiah, serving God with religious authority and great praise for his piety, smashed it.
The same Father, in the first book, Chapter 10, of "The Harmony of the Gospels," which he published against the pagans, discusses those who claimed that the Lord Jesus Christ wrote a book in epistolary style and handed it to Peter and Paul. He says: When they wanted to fabricate something that Christ wrote to his disciples, they thought of those to whom he could most easily be believed to have written, namely, to those who were closest to him, to whom such a secret could be worthily entrusted. And Peter and Paul came to their minds. I believe that they often saw Peter and Paul depicted together with him because Rome solemnly commemorates the merits of Peter and Paul, especially because of their shared day of martyrdom. Thus, they deserved to err completely, seeking Christ and his apostles not in holy books but on painted walls. This is what Saint Augustine said.

From this, it's clear that if the bronze serpent, which God commanded to be made, was destroyed by King Hezekiah because people began to worship it as an idol, then the images of saints should definitely be destroyed as well.
The saints themselves would favor this since they are deeply offended by their images being worshiped like idols, which disrespects divine religion, and thus should be completely eradicated.
Especially since God did not command these images to be made; they were created by human imagination.
That God is worshiped more purely without images is also supported by Quintus Lucilius Balbus, a pagan philosopher.
As the doctor mentions in the fourth book of "The City of God" (Chapter 30) with these words:
"Do you see, therefore, how reason derived from physical things has been misguided into fictitious and imaginary gods?
This has led to false beliefs, chaotic errors, and almost childish superstitions.
For we have known the forms of the gods, their ages, and their clothing and adornment; moreover, their kinds, marriages, relationships, and everything transferred to the likeness of human weakness.
For they are depicted with disturbed minds.
We have also accepted the desires, sicknesses, and anger of the gods.
And indeed, as the stories tell, the gods were not free from wars and battles.
Not only, as in Homer, where different gods defended the opposing armies, but also they fought their own battles with the Titans or the Giants.
These things are both said and believed very foolishly, and they are full of vanity and utmost triviality.
See, in the meantime, what those who defend the gods of the nations admit.
Then, when he says these things pertain to superstition, but not to religion, as he seems to say according to the Stoics.
For not only philosophers, he says, but also our ancestors separated superstition from religion.
For those who prayed and sacrificed all day long so that their children would survive them were called superstitious."

Who doesn't understand that he is trying to praise the religion of the ancestors while fearing the customs of the city and wanting to separate it from superstition, but not finding a way to do it?
If those who prayed and sacrificed all day were called superstitious by the ancestors, then wouldn't those who established the criticized images of gods—distinguished by different ages and attire, the kinds of gods, marriages, kinships—also be considered superstitious?
When these things are blamed as superstitious, it implicates the ancestors, the founders, and the worshippers of such images.
And after a few lines (Chapter 31): The same sharp and learned author says that those who seem to understand what God is believe Him to be a soul governing the world with movement and reason. Although he didn't yet grasp the full truth (for the true God is not a soul, but the creator and maker of the soul as well), if he could free himself from the prejudices of custom, he would admit and persuade that one God should be worshipped, governing the world with movement and reason. The debate with him would then be that he says God is a soul, rather than the creator of the soul.
He also says that the ancient Romans worshipped gods without images for more than 170 years. If this had remained, the gods would be observed more chastely. As a witness to his opinion, among other things, he would also cite the Jewish people. He doesn't hesitate to conclude that those who first placed the images of gods among the people took away fear from their cities and added error; wisely thinking that gods could easily be despised in the foolishness of images.

Blessed Augustine also says in his little book on True Religion that nothing hinders the perception of truth more than a life given to lust and false imaginations of sensible things, which are impressed upon us by this sensible world through the body, generating various opinions and errors.
He believed there would be no error in religion if the soul did not worship the soul, the body, or its own phantasms instead of God, which are nothing but figments attracted by the bodily senses from the appearance of the body.
Therefore, let us serve the Creator rather than the creature, and not vanish in our thoughts. This is perfect religion.
He also says in Chapter 25: Since the Catholic Church is spread and founded throughout the entire world, those miracles were not allowed to endure in our times, lest the soul always seeks visible things and the human race becomes cold by their familiarity, which once burned with their novelty.
Also, in Chapters 33 and 34: The mind judges perversely when it is made not the eye but the mind to contemplate supreme beauty. He wants to turn the mind to bodies, the eyes to God. For he seeks to understand the carnal and to see the spiritual, which cannot be done. Therefore, this perversity must be corrected, because unless what is above is made below, and what is below is made above, it will not be fit for the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore, let us not seek the highest in the lowest, nor cling to the lowest. Let us judge them, lest we be judged with them; that is, let us give them only as much as their lowest form deserves, lest when we seek the first in the last, we are counted among the last from the first.
He also says in Chapter 55: Let us not have religion as the worship of dead men, because if they lived piously, they do not seek such honors; but they want us to worship Him, by whose illumination they rejoice that we share in their merit. Therefore, they are to be honored for imitation, not worshiped for religion.
Let us not have religion as the worship of human works. For the artisans themselves, who make such things, are better, yet we should not worship them. Let us not have religion in our phantasms.

It's better to have any kind of truth than anything imagined by one's own will. Even though the soul itself is true, we shouldn't worship it when it imagines falsehoods. True straw is better than light formed by empty thoughts according to the will of the one guessing. Yet, it's foolish to believe that the straw we can feel and touch should be worshipped.
He says the same in his letter to Consentium (Letter 85):
"When veneration begins to weaken due to carnal thoughts and vain imagination, we should promptly break and remove such things from our faith with the help and illumination of the one who does not want to dwell with such idols in our hearts, so that not even a trace of such phantasms remains there."
The same teacher testifies in his letter to Januarius, saying (Letter 119, Chapter 20):
"Those who read lots from the pages of the Gospels, although it is preferable that they do this rather than consult demons, I still disapprove of this practice. It's not right to turn divine oracles, which speak about another life, to secular affairs and the vanity of this life."
Blessed Jerome speaks similarly when he discusses the words of the Lord, which go like this: "They enlarge their phylacteries and lengthen their tassels." He says that those little tags of the Decalogue were called phylacteries; whoever had them supposedly had protection and defense for themselves. The Pharisees did not understand that these should be carried in the heart, not on the body; otherwise, even chests and boxes have books, but they do not have knowledge of God. This is what superstitious women among us still do with small Gospels, pieces of the cross, and similar things (who have zeal for God, but not according to knowledge).

From such practices (to also use the words of blessed Pope Leo), there arises an impiety where the sun, rising at the beginning of daylight, is worshiped by some of the more foolish people from elevated places. Some Christians also believe they are acting religiously when, before they reach the basilica of blessed Peter the apostle, which is dedicated to the one true and living God, they first climb the steps leading to the higher altar, turn their bodies toward the rising sun, and bow in honor of the shining orb.
We greatly lament and regret this, partly because of ignorance and partly because of a spirit of paganism. For although some may perhaps worship the creator of the beautiful light rather than the light itself, which is a creation, they must still refrain from this kind of practice. When someone who has abandoned the worship of gods sees this in our practices, wouldn’t they consider this part of the old belief as plausible, seeing that it is common to both Christians and pagans?
Therefore, this condemnable perversity should be cast out from the customs of the faithful, and the honor due to the one God should not be mixed with the rites of those who serve created things. For the Divine Scripture says: You shall worship the Lord your God and Him only shall you serve. And blessed Job, a blameless man as the Lord says, and refraining from all evil, declares: Have I ever seen the sun shining, and the moon advancing brightly, and my heart rejoiced in secret, and I kissed my hand, which is the greatest iniquity and a denial against the Most High God.
But what are the sun and moon except elements of visible and corporeal light, one of greater brightness and the other of lesser light? Just as there are different times for day and night, so the Creator established different qualities in the lights; yet before these were made, there were days without the service of the sun and nights without the ministry of the moon.

These things were established for the benefit of humans, so that a rational being would not be misled by differences in months, the return of years, or the counting of time.
With the unequal hours' varying durations, the clear signs of different risings, the sun concluding the years, and the moon renewing the months.
For on the fourth day, as we read, God said: Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the earth, to divide the day from the night, and to be for signs and for seasons, and for days and for years, and let them be lights in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the earth.
Awaken, O man, and recognize the dignity of your nature.
Remember you were made in the image of God: which, although corrupted in Adam, is reformed in Christ.
Use visible creatures as they should be used, as you use the earth, the sea, the sky, the air, the springs, and the rivers; and whatever is beautiful and wonderful in them, attribute to the praise and glory of the Creator.
Do not be devoted to the light that birds and serpents, beasts and cattle, flies and worms delight in.
Perceive the physical light with your physical senses; and with all the affection of your mind embrace that true light which enlightens every person coming into this world, and of which the Prophet says: Approach him, and be enlightened, and your faces will not be ashamed.
For if we are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwells in us; what a faithful person has in their soul is greater than what they marvel at in the sky.
Therefore, beloved, we do not command or advise you to despise the works of God, or to consider anything contrary to your faith in what the good God has created as good; but to use all the beauty of creatures and the entire ornamentation of this world reasonably and temperately.
For as the Apostle says, the things that are seen are temporary; but the things that are not seen are eternal.
Hence, because we are born for the present, but reborn for the future; let us not be devoted to temporary goods, but be intent on eternal ones.

To take a closer look at our hope, let's consider what divine grace has given our nature through the sacrament of the Lord's birth. Let's hear the Apostle say:
"For you have died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. When Christ, your life, appears, then you also will appear with Him in glory."
As the blessed pope and orthodox doctor pointed out, it's crucial to understand that if the works of God's hands are not to be worshipped or venerated, even in honor of God, then how much more should the works of human hands not be worshipped or venerated, even in honor of those whose likenesses they represent?
If any image were to be worshipped or venerated, it should be the Creator's rather than the creature's. After all, God made man in His image and likeness. However, man cannot create anything that truly reflects the likeness of man in mind and reason.
If someone sculpts or paints a likeness of the body or its parts, they are depicting what is least in man, not what is greatest. Surely, if humans were to be worshipped, it should be the living ones rather than painted ones, where they have the likeness of God, not where they resemble animals or, more accurately, lifeless stones or wood, lacking life, sense, and reason.
The blessed Augustine discusses this in his book On True Religion (Chapter 5):
"Just men, finding all their joy in the one God, rejoice with those who praise God through their deeds. But when they themselves are praised as if it were their own doing, they correct those who err as much as they can; those they cannot correct, they do not rejoice with and wish to be corrected from that vice.
If the good angels and all the holy ministries of God are similar or even purer and holier, what do we fear that we might offend any of them if we are not superstitious, striving towards the one God with their help and binding our souls to Him alone, from which religion is believed to be named, and avoiding all superstition?"

And after some interjections: Therefore, he said, let religion bind us to one omnipotent God, because between our mind, by which we understand Him as Father and truth, that is, inner light, and Him, no creature is interposed.
In book twenty-two, chapter ten of "The City of God": The martyrs perform miracles, or rather, God does, either with them cooperating or praying, so that the faith may progress, by which we believe that they are not our gods, but that we have one God with us. Finally, pagans erected temples for their gods, built altars, established priests, and made sacrifices. But we do not build temples for our martyrs as for gods, but memorials for them as dead humans, whose spirits live with God. Nor do we erect altars there, on which we might sacrifice to the martyrs, but we offer sacrifices to the one God of both the martyrs and ourselves. For this sacrifice, the martyrs, who conquered the world by confessing Him, are mentioned in their proper place and order; yet they are not invoked by the priest who sacrifices. For he sacrifices to God, not to them, although he sacrifices in their memory, because he is God's priest, not theirs. The sacrifice itself is the body of Christ, which is not offered to them, because they are also part of it. So far, blessed Augustine.
This is the true religion, this is the Catholic custom, this is the ancient tradition of the Fathers, as is easily confirmed from the Book of Sacraments, which the Roman Church holds. Whoever surpasses or abandons this mode of veneration, disregards the discipline of his Father, and abandons the law of his Mother. Therefore, neither grace will be added to his head, nor a necklace to his neck. Let the royal way be held. The apostles, the teachers of the Church, taught this; the leaders of the flock held to this. For the sheep of God, leaving the shepherd, deviating from the way where the leader goes, gets caught in thorns, and is devoured by wolves. Let us offer glory and honor to the Lord alone, and let us not fornicate with idols, becoming like those about whom God says: I also have broken their hearts for fornicating and turning away from me, and their eyes for fornicating through various things.

And the Apostle Peter: Eyes full of adultery and incessant sin. Jerusalem is also said to have committed fornication with the sons of the Chaldeans, seeing them depicted on the wall.
Let God be adored, worshipped, and venerated by the faithful; let sacrifices be made to Him alone, whether in the mystery of the body and blood, by which we are redeemed, or in the sacrifice of a contrite and humble heart.
Let angels and holy men be loved and honored with charity, not servitude. The body of Christ should not be offered to them, as they are part of it themselves. Let us not place our hope in man, but in God; lest it be said of us what the prophet said: Cursed is the man who trusts in man and makes flesh his strength, and whose heart departs from the Lord.
The Catholic doctors of the Church confirm that this also applies to those who believed the Lord Jesus Christ was merely a man, not also God, and therefore trusted in man and were cursed.
No one should deceive themselves, no one should mislead themselves, no one should trick themselves. Whoever worships any picture or cast or sculpted statue does not give worship to God; does not honor angels or holy men, but venerates idols. The cunning and deceitful enemy of the human race does this, under the pretense of honoring the saints, to reintroduce idols, to be worshipped again through various images; to turn us away from spiritual things and immerse us in carnal things; so that we are worthy to hear from the Apostle: O foolish ones, who has bewitched you? And: Are you so foolish that, having begun in the Spirit, you now finish in the flesh? For Satan, as the same Apostle says, transforms himself into an angel of light.
Finally, he introduces feasting and drunkenness under the name of charity, simulates inflexible pride and unyielding hardness as unshakable constancy of mind, and calls blind zeal rectitude. Therefore, the apostle John says: Do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God.
Let us look at a picture as a picture, lacking life, sense, and reason. Let the eye be fed by this vision.

However, let the mind revere God, who grants the crown of victory to His saints and gives us the help of their intercession.
The ancients had images of saints either painted or sculpted, as was shown earlier; but for the sake of history, to remember, not to worship.
For example, in the synodical acts, where Catholics, supported by truth and victorious, were depicted, while heretics, exposed by the lies of false doctrine, were convicted and expelled, to remind of the firmness of the Catholic faith, similar to the custom of wars, both external and civil, to commemorate the event; as we see in many places.
But none of the ancient Catholics ever thought those images should be worshiped or adored.
Now, however, the error has become so widespread that worshiping images and placing hope in them is akin to the heresy of idolatry or Anthropomorphites.
But what is the cause of this error?
Faith has been removed from the heart, and all trust is placed in visible things.
Just as when we see painted armed men, or those engaged in farming, or harvesting, or in ships fishing and casting nets, or hunters with spears extended, chasing deer and wild boars with dogs, we do not expect to receive any increase in the army, or help with the annual work, or heaps of wheat, or streams of wine, or fish, deer, and boars from them.
So also, if we see painted winged angels, preaching apostles, martyrs suffering torment, we should not expect any help from the images we look at; because they can neither do harm nor good.
Rightly, indeed, to eliminate such superstition, it was decreed by the orthodox fathers that pictures should not be made in the Church: Lest what is worshiped and adored be painted on walls.
What presumption is it that without a basilica, without an altar, without the relics of saints, masses are celebrated over such images; when the holy Fathers in the Council of Carthage decreed (Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae, title)

The altars built here and there in fields or along roads as memorials to martyrs, where no body or relics of the martyrs are confirmed to be buried, should be demolished by the bishops who oversee those areas, if possible. However, if this cannot be done due to public unrest, people should be advised not to frequent those places, so that those who think correctly are not held captive by any superstition.
Absolutely no memorial of martyrs should be accepted unless there is a body or some relics, or the origin of a dwelling, possession, or passion is faithfully recorded. Altars built based on dreams or supposed revelations of any kind should be completely disapproved. In those days, these statutes were sufficient because the error had not yet arisen where images drawn with charcoal, red lead, or vermilion are called holy images and preached to be worshipped.
Let deceit not retreat to its fraudulent hiding places to claim that it does not worship the images of saints, but the saints themselves. For God declares in
Isaiah 42:8:
"I will not give my glory to another, nor my praise to idols."
And the Apostle, about our Lord, the mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, says in
Philippians 2:9:
"Therefore God exalted Him and gave Him the name that is above every name."
He further explains what this name is in
Philippians 2:10-11:
"That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."
This power, praise, dominion, this name that is above every name, no holy angel or holy man claims for himself. For the angel who claimed it, or the man whom he persuaded to claim it, both fell.
If any man or angel is worshipped, other than He who is both God and man and is testified by the Prophet to be the Angel of the great counsel, there is no other name that is or can be above or equal to this name that is above every name.

But since no one is equal to God, no one else is essentially Jesus—the Savior. We should trust the Apostle and submit to divine authority. Let us bow our knees in the name of Jesus alone, which is above every name. Otherwise, if we give this honor to someone else, we may be considered strangers by God and be left to follow our own desires and inventions.

