"We confess," they say, "the Son of God, God from God, light from light."

It may not seem sacrilegious to challenge the perfect profession of the Catholic faith with malicious arguments, but we must ensure that we don't lose what they do not share with us by focusing on what they do.

Therefore, we recognize and reverently accept the words of the common faith, but what shall we do?

This is the twisted doctrine of the Ariomaniacs.

Even when they say "God from God, light from light," they mean another God from God, another light from light, suggesting that the Son is from the Father but not in the Father. In their view, He is made God by God, not begotten in God.

Furthermore, some of their writings, despite claiming "God from God, light from light," teach through heretical arguments that He is separated from the Father and entirely cut off.

They say that the Son of God took a man from Mary through whom He suffered.

In their writings, they confessed what they had conceived in their minds, revealing their hidden beliefs: that the Son of God took a man from Mary through whom He suffered.

First, I do not see why they preferred to say "capable of suffering" rather than simply admitting "capable of being affected."

As if suffering is different from being affected.

Furthermore, if God is impassible, He is surely also incapable of being affected.

Therefore, He neither suffered nor was affected, in so far as He is God.

Finally, the Apostle says, "He suffered" (Second Corinthians 13:4), from weakness, surely of the flesh (for the flesh is weak (Matthew 26:41); the spirit is willing); but He lives by the power of God: surely by Himself.

For He Himself, the power of God, having life in Himself: we believe that our Lord consists of two substances, namely human and divine; and thus He was immortal in the divine, as He was mortal in the human nature: born of one, proven by the other: immortal in one, mortal in the other.

Finally, the same Apostle says, "Christ" (First Corinthians 15:3), "died": that is, anointed: for this name derives from anointing.

Therefore, if nothing other than the flesh was anointed; the flesh is therefore said to have died, whenever Christ is announced to have died.