These teachers no longer keep the secrets of their craft to themselves.

They oppose the truth, even when they claim to uphold it, appearing gentle like lambs but speaking fiercely like dragons.

They aim to separate the Son from the Father and place Him below God, citing the Gospel: "The Father is greater than I" (John 14:28).

But how is He greater?

With heretical presumption, they assert it is by honor, glory, dignity, and majesty.

Yet, if this were true, why is it commanded that everyone should honor the Son just as they honor the Father?

If this is so, then every day we blaspheme in our thanksgivings and sacrifices, confessing these things as common to both the Father and the Son.

The Son cannot fail to possess everything that belongs to the Father, since He is wholly in the Father.

John says: "No one has ever seen God, but the only Son, who is in the bosom of the Father" (John 1:18).

Thus, he says: "All that belongs to you is mine, and all that is mine is yours" (John 17:10).

And: "The Son can do nothing by himself" (John 5:19).

And: "I have come not to do my will, but the will of him who sent me" (John 6:38).

This is not a confession of weakness, but an assertion of unity.

For He also said, to counter weakness and emphasize unity: "He who sent me is with me" (John 6:29).

And: "The Father dwelling in me does His works" (John 14:10).

And: "The words I speak are not mine, but the Father's" (John 7:16).

Therefore, whatever is detracted from the Son is also detracted from the Father.

For neither does one act without the other, because one cannot exist without the other.

The Son is not the Son without the Father, nor is the Father the Father without the Son.

"The Father," he says, "is greater than I."

But the fullness of the same divinity is in the Son.

The Apostle says: "For no matter how many promises God has made, they are 'Yes' in Christ" (Second Corinthians 1:20).

Do the duties of the Son dissolve the state of divinity?

For everything that God is, is embodied in Christ, if majesty is perceived as belonging to another.

It will belong to another if the Father is greater in majesty.

But this majesty, because it is one, namely of one God, cannot be imperfect.

It is imperfect if unequal; it is unequal if one is lesser than the other.