They claim the Son is subject to the Father, along with everything the Father subjected to Him. They disguise this poisonous idea with fancy words.

We steadfastly preach what we have heard from our fathers: so you should not abandon the teachings of your ancestors. They said freely that the God of heavenly glory is not the true God, but a perfect creation of God. You, however, while feeling the same, avoid blunt blasphemy by using ambiguous words to deceive the simple and unwary.

You call the Son subject to the Father, not in the manner the holy and catholic Church does, but by the condition of a creature. When you say the Son is subject to the Father along with everything the Father subjected to Him, are you not counting Him among the creatures established in time?

According to you, God and our Lord has nothing more than any other creature, except that He is first in number, and that those things also serve Him with which He serves. For if He serves, He is also a servant; and though He is the Lord of some, He is Lord by will, if by the will of the Lord He is made Lord, serving in that He is commanded to rule. This is what you secretly believe, and what your fathers openly declared: that the Son of God was begotten by the Father without time, and was not established before He was born.

What is this, I ask, but dullness of heart? What forgetfulness of hope? Even worse, what kind of mad and blasphemous confession is it to call Him God, whom you compare to all things made from nothing?

This mocks the Son with the false name of divinity if it is said by word that He is, but is denied in the heart; and it makes God the Father a liar, saying:

"I am who I am" (Exodus 3:14); and: "I alone am the Lord" (Isaiah 63:11); and: "I will not give my glory to another" (Isaiah 42:8; 48:11); and: "Hear, O Israel, the Lord your God is one Lord"; and:

"Do not seek my name, for God is my name" (Deuteronomy 6:4).

If, therefore, there is one God, this name belongs to the one. But He will no longer be one, unless in God the Father the Son is God? And rightly, the Lord, according to the prophet, who said: "Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord" (Psalm 117:26): He says, "I came in the name of my Father" (John 5:43). What name of the Father, except the name of God and Lord? which John recognizes in the Son: "He who is," he says, "and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty" (Revelation 1:8).