They say that the Father has no beginning, is invisible, is immortal, and is impassible.

They propose these things to attribute the opposite to the Son.

For whatever they deny about the Father, they confess about the Son.

If He is proven to have a beginning, then He is rightfully mortal and rightfully passible.

It should indeed be prejudged that the other forms of suffering do not apply to the Son, with the initial proposition being destroyed—the one that gave a beginning to God's Word.

However, so that we do not doubt more than the rest of the profane propositions, let us reconsider.

For just as the other things that are subject to this definition cannot be ascribed to one who has no beginning, so if one of them is proven to be related, it is fair that the defended things are also dissolved.

They say that the Father is invisible.

As if we ever find that the Son was visible without transformation before He became corporeal by obeying the Father from eternity.

For although He appeared to Abraham, and Jacob, and Moses, and Isaiah, and Ezekiel, yet the quality of that vision is explained.

For He is reported to have been seen in a dream, in a mirror, and in a riddle.

Finally, when Moses requested to see Him clearly, God said, 
 "No one can see my face and live" 
 (Exodus 33:20).

Therefore, in this place, they should either contend that the Father, who claims to be invisible, spoke, or if they do not deny the Son, they should know that He spoke and that the Father was invisible in His own name, as the Word, as the Spirit.

Finally, the same scripture testifies how the invisible God was seen.

For it reports that God spoke with him, as with a friend, face to face.

And then it adds that Moses requested to see His face, which he would not have requested if he had already seen it.

Jacob indeed said, 
 "I have seen the Lord face to face, and my life is preserved" 
 (Genesis 32:30).

But how was he saved by seeing that face, which, if seen, kills?

How did the Lord both show His face and later say that it could not be seen, unless in the condition we mentioned above, namely in a mirror and a riddle, in a dream and vision?

Therefore, He assumed that visible matter when it pleased Him, but immediately remained invisible.

For it is necessary, if He is taught to be visible, that He is not from the one whom we confess to be invisible.