If anyone insists on choosing between two options—to recognize one God singularly if we confess one, or to proclaim two if we call both the Father and the Son God—let it be clear that we do not favor one over the other, nor do we separate them. We speak of one in two as the Lord Himself said: "I and the Father are one" 
John

10:30
, so that two are believed to have one power.

He did not speak as one person, of both the Father and the Son, as if the Son were confirming Himself as the Father: "I am my Son"; and: "Today I have begotten myself"; and: "Before the dawn, I begot myself"; and: "The Lord created me as the beginning of His ways"; and: "Before the ages, He established me"; and: "I and the Father are one": but He revealed the mystery through distinction, not division of persons:

"I," He says, "am in the Father, and the Father in Me: I and the Father are one": and: "Whoever has seen Me has seen the Father." To see the Son is to see the Father, the true image and exact representation of His being, that is, the Word of God, not a mere sound, but a substantial entity. What He made from such substantiality did not exist without substance. Therefore, nothing is empty from fullness, nothing void from solid: because the Word of God, the Spirit of God, is Christ, made manifest; and, to speak more clearly, the body of the Word: for the body is spirit, but a body of its own kind. For the spirit is invisible and incomprehensible. Is God, then, an empty and void thing? For God is spirit.

Finally: "No one knows what is in God, except the Spirit who is in Him" 
First Corinthians

2:11
. We indeed read: "Who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been His counselor" 
Romans

11:34
? Certainly no one, but outside of His spirit no one: which spirit the prophet calls wise, an architect, and a wonderful counselor: not without reason. For the same spirit is the Word and wisdom of God: from whose persona Solomon says: "When He prepared the heavens, I was there" 
Proverbs

8:27
; and: "I was with Him, and I was His delight" 
8:30
. Therefore, no one is a counselor, because by Him all things were made that were made. Finally, since the same wisdom is both the Word of God and the Spirit of God, the roles of each name are declared. Wisdom was present with the Father creating all things: by His Word, the heavens were made firm, and by the spirit of His mouth, all their power 
Psalms

33:6
. Therefore, it appears that the same one is referred to sometimes as the spirit, and other times as wisdom.