Now, this knowledge is no longer hidden, as it is revealed for a reason. God, who punishes ignorance, is not unjust, as He would not punish if He had not given knowledge. He provided this through the Holy Spirit. Indeed, the Spirit, He says, will tell you all truth 
(John 16:13)
. When He says all truth, certainly nothing is excluded. This is the Spirit of knowledge and truth, through whom Solomon spoke of the Lord's birth: 

"What it is," he says, "and wisdom, and how it was made, I will tell, and I will investigate it from the beginning of its birth" 
(Wisdom 6:24)
.

Therefore, through the same Spirit, we can find what we are seeking. For the Apostle also says: 

"God has revealed it to us through His Spirit; for the Spirit searches everything, even the depths of God" 
(1 Corinthians 2:10)
.

No one knows what is in God except the Spirit of God: and if that Spirit dwells in us, as the Apostle confirms, we can therefore understand the secrets of God through the same Spirit.

Truly: 

"Seek, and you will find; ask, and it will be given to you; knock, and it will be opened to you" 
(Matthew 7:7; Luke 11:24)
.

And again: 

"Father, you have hidden these things from the wise and revealed them to little children" 
(Matthew 11:25)
: certainly to us, to whom the Lord says: "To you it has been given to know the mystery of God" 
(Matthew 13:11)
; that mystery of which the Apostle says: "What was not made known to the sons of men in other generations is now revealed to His saints" 
(Ephesians 3:5)
.

Clearly revealed. For He has shown the glorious riches of His grace to us in Christ, who is the glory of God the Father.

He is the true offspring of the Unbegotten. This means: No one knows how the Son was begotten. Certainly no one, except those in whom, as the Lord says, His word does not penetrate 
(John 8:37)
; just as it did not to the Jews, to whom the same Lord says: 

"You do not know where I come from or where I am going; because you judge according to the flesh" 
(John 8:14-15)
.

How can no one know if the Father says: 

"My heart has uttered a good word" 
(Psalm 45:2)
? 

How can no one know if the Son says: 

"I came forth from the mouth of the Most High" 
(Sirach 24:5)
?

Do not seek further, and you have nothing more to ask; for you know everything: because what is said is everything. "I came forth," He says, "from the mouth of the Most High."

This is the perfect birth of the Word, the beginning without a beginning. This is the beginning having a beginning in birth, in a state not having a beginning. For from the unbegotten God, a begotten God came forth, one from one, true from true, full from full; and thus by being born in what always was, He did not begin to be what was born of the unbegotten, nor does He have time as He is naturally co-eternal with the timeless Father. For it is written: 

"God is Spirit" 
(John 4:24)
: and He was born eternal from God.

Therefore, of His nature, which consists of eternity. The Son is not imperfect, even though He is born, because He was born from the perfect: nor is He diminished who begot, because He begot from Himself. For He gave all to all, so that according to the power of the Spirit, He would be whole in the whole.