When it is said that the Father has no beginning, it implies the Son also has no beginning. Why assert this about the Father, which is already known, unless it is to counter the idea that the Son began at a different time? The Father has no beginning. Who denies this? Similarly, I believe that the image of the invisible and unbegotten God could not have begun after God.

When Moses asked who He was, He replied: 
 "I am who I am always" 
 (Exodus 3:14). For He was always, who is and will always be. John says: 
 "What was from the beginning, our eyes have seen" 
 (First John 1:1). And again: 
 "We declare to you the eternal life that was with the Father" 
 (First John 1:2): certainly, and in the Father: for what was from Him could not be outside Him. 

When it is said: "There was time in Him," it does not mean that He was in time. The power of the eternal substance was not made by God but came from God. So He says, 
 "I came from the Father" 
 (John 16:28): and, 
 "I and the Father are one" 
 (John 10:30); and: 
 "Whoever sees me sees the Father" 
 (John 14:9); and: 
 "I am in the Father, and the Father is in me" 
 (John 14:10); and: 
 "He who sent me is with me" 
 (John 8:29). 

Therefore, David also says: 
 "With you is the beginning on the day of your power" 
 (Psalm 110:3). For the Word of God, that is, the Son of God, was with Him before every beginning, and in Him who has no beginning. Solomon, speaking as Wisdom (which we affirm to be Christ), said: 
 "The Lord created me, and founded me before the age, and I was born before the abyss" 
 (Proverbs 8:22-24). 

However, it is not to be believed that God was made. If He was made, He was not; if He was not, He will not be. How can He be God if both conditions imply He is not God? Therefore, the Wisdom of God is described as born and created, so nothing else in nature is believed to exist besides God the Father Himself, who is also the origin of His powers.

From then on, it would be rightly said: Wisdom was created from Him and in Him, from whom the only-begotten and blessed birth shone forth. Therefore, whoever proves that the Father was ever without the Word, without wisdom, without reason, without power, without Spirit; proves that the Son was not with the Father and in the Father before every beginning. Yet I do not know if the Father, lacking these virtues, can be called God. For not only is God perfect in His eternity, but indeed no creature will stand uncompleted according to its kind.

Nothing can exist that is not; it will not exist if it lacks what it should be. Therefore, the Father lacked everything if He lacked anything from the whole. However, He lacked nothing if His Son, who is the fullness of His virtues, did not lack a beginning: and it is necessary that this opinion does not lead to blasphemy with a profane and sacrilegious conclusion.

Either the Father must be believed to have begun with His Son, because He could not be without His Son, that is, without His virtues; and there would be some third God who is the author of this beginning of theirs: or if He alone is said to be without beginning up to the generation of the Son, He must be said to have been imperfect. For He is imperfect if He began to have what He did not have before. He, however, who always had to be perfect, had to have everything always: because whatever occupies the whole does not receive an increase.