Although I have spoken many times, albeit briefly, about the healing of penitents, I am reminded of the Lord's concern, who did not spare even His own neck and shoulders for the sake of one lost sheep, bringing the delicate sinner back to the restored flock.

I will try, as best as I can, to convey in writing the example of such great virtue and to imitate the Lord's diligent work with the modesty befitting a servant.

One thing I fear, my dear ones, is that by repeatedly pointing out the usual faults, I may end up reminding people of their sins rather than curbing them.

It might be better, following the example of Solon of Athens, to remain silent about grievous crimes rather than warn against them since our people's behavior has progressed to the point where they believe they are being instructed when they are forbidden.

Indeed, I think that Cervulus, by being more marked, only became more diligent.

The entire reprimand for expressed and often repeated disgrace seems not to have suppressed but rather taught indulgence.

Oh, woe is me! What crime have I committed?

I believe they would not have known about Cervulus if I had not shown it to them by reprimanding him.

But let that be.

Those who have fled from God or are placed outside the Church are even more irritated by the injury of chastisement, indignant that their behavior could be criticized by anyone.

Just as mud smells worse when stirred, fire burns more when stoked, and rage intensifies when provoked, so they broke the necessary rebuke's goads with a contrary kick, not without their own harm and wound in resisting.

Nevertheless, my dear ones, remember what is stated by the Lord: "Rebuke the wise, and they will love you; rebuke a fool, and they will hate you" (Proverbs 9:8).

And again: "I rebuke and discipline those whom I love" (Revelation 3:19).

Therefore, believe that the gentle and diligent care of my work, taken up according to the Lord's will by me, your brother and priest, is more about love than severity.

Follow it lovingly, not stubbornly resisting.

Furthermore, let no one think that this talk on the institution of Repentance is addressed only to penitents, so that anyone not in this situation might disdain what is said as if it were meant for others.

For this discipline is noted as a kind of buckle for the whole Church, providing for Catechumens not to proceed to this, for the faithful not to return to it, and for penitents to strive quickly to reach the fruit of this work.

My discourse will follow this order: First, I will explain the nature of sins so that no one thinks that the utmost penalty is imposed on all sins indiscriminately.

Then, I will speak about those believers who, out of misplaced shame, are reluctant to seek their remedy and, with polluted body and mind, partake in the sacrament: timid before men but impudent before the Lord, defiling with profane hands and polluted mouths, even the altar revered by saints and angels.

Third, I will speak about those who, having confessed their sins, either do not know or refuse to undertake the acts of repentance and the administration of exomologesis.

Finally, we will strive to show clearly what punishment awaits those who do not repent or are negligent, and what reward, what crown, awaits those who cleanse the stains of their conscience with proper and orderly confession.

First, as we said, let us reconsider the nature of sins, diligently seeking what are sins, what are crimes, so that no one thinks, because of the innumerable offenses from which no one is immune, that I bind all people by an indiscriminate law of repentance.

Among Moses and the ancients, even the smallest sin, and a mere penny's worth (so to speak), were tossed in the same sea of misfortune.

Those who violated the Sabbath, those who touched the unclean, those who ate forbidden foods, those who murmured, those with a corrupted wall, and those with a stained garment in the temple of the Most High King.

They had crossed, and those who had touched the altars with their hands or their clothes. It was better to ascend to heaven quickly or to die rather than to preserve all these things.

Therefore, the blood of the Lord has freed us from all these and many other carnal vices, so that each one may reach their destination more quickly, redeemed from the bondage of the law and emancipated into the freedom of faith.

And so the apostle Paul says: "But you have been called to freedom" 

Galatians
 5:13.

This is that freedom; that we are not bound by everything that the old ones were bound by; but given, so to speak, a forest of sins and the indulgence of remedies, we are confined to a few and necessary things, which are both very easy to keep for believers and to avoid. So that the one who did not even keep these few things, being ungrateful for such a great gift, would most deservedly not refuse hell. Let us see what these are.

After the Lord's passion, the Apostles, having discussed and considered everything, sent a letter to those who had believed from the nations. The content of this letter was: "The apostles and elders, brothers, to the brothers who are in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia who are from the nations, greetings. Because we have heard that some of us went out and disturbed you with words" 

Acts
 15:24-25.

Also below: "For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things: That you abstain from things offered to idols, from blood, and from fornication; from which if you keep yourselves, you will do well. Farewell" 

Acts
 15:28-29.

This is the entire conclusion of the New Testament. The Holy Spirit, despised in many things, has left us this condition of mortal danger. Other sins are healed by the compensation of better works; but these three crimes, like the breath of a basilisk, like a cup of poison, like a deadly arrow, must be feared, for they do not only corrupt the soul but intercept it.

Therefore, tight-fistedness will be redeemed by kindness; slander by satisfaction; sadness by joy; harshness by gentleness; gravity by lightness; perversity by honesty; and whatever is corrected by its opposites benefits. But what will the despiser of God do? What will a murderer do? What remedy will a fornicator take? Can the one who deserted God appease Him? Or preserve his own blood, he who shed another's? Or restore God's temple, he who violated it by fornication? These are capital, brothers; these are mortal.

Now listen to John, and trust if you can: "If anyone sees his brother committing a sin not leading to death, he shall ask, and God will give him life, to those who commit sins that do not lead to death. There is a sin that leads to death: I do not say that one should pray for that" 

First
 John 5:16.

But if you please, also hear separately about each one.

When Moses was pleading for the blasphemous people, God said: "Whoever has sinned against me, I will blot out of my book" 

Exodus
 32:33.

And about the murderer, the Lord judges this: "Whoever kills with the sword must be killed with the sword" 

Exodus
 21:12.

And about the fornicator, the apostle says: "Do not defile the temple of God, which you are: If anyone destroys God's temple, God will destroy him" 

First
 Corinthians 3:17.

These things are written, beloved brothers, and engraved in perpetual monuments; written and inscribed not, I say, in wax and paper and bronze or with a pen, but in the book of the living God. Heaven and earth will pass away, but not one iota or one dot will pass from the law until all is accomplished 

Matthew
 5:18.

So what? Must we die? Many have fallen into these sins in their minds. Many are guilty of blood, many have been enslaved to idols, many are adulterers. I also add that not only hands are punished in murder, but every plan that led another's soul to death: nor only those who burned incense to profane altars, but every lust wandering outside of marital bed and lawful embraces is bound by the guilt of death.

Whoever does these things after faith will not see the face of God. They despaired, being guilty of such great crimes. What did I do to you? Was it not in your power not to do it? Did no one warn you? Did no one predict it?

Did the Church remain silent?

Did the Gospels say nothing?

Did the Apostles not warn us?

Did the priest not ask anything?

Why do you seek late comforts?

It would have been right when it was allowed.

This is a harsh word; but those who call you happy are leading you into error and confusing the paths of your feet.

He who flatters the guilty after their crimes shows the way of wrongdoing to the innocent.

Therefore, someone might say, are we doomed?

And where is the merciful God, who does not seek death and does not delight in the destruction of the living?

Will we die in our sins?

And what will you do, priest?

With what benefits will you balance so many losses to the Church?

Take the remedy if you have begun to despair; if you recognize yourselves as miserable, if you are afraid.

He who trusts too much is unworthy.

"Upon whom," says the Lord, "shall I look, except upon the humble and quiet and one who trembles at my word" 
(Isaiah 66:2)
?

Therefore, I first call upon you, brothers, who refuse penance after committing crimes:

you, I say, who are timid after impudence, ashamed after sins, who are not ashamed to sin but are ashamed to confess;

who, with a guilty conscience, touch the holy things of God and do not fear the altar of the Lord;

who approach the hands of the priest, who in the presence of angels, with the confidence of innocence;

who insult divine patience;

who, to a silent God, as if to one who does not know, bring a polluted soul and a profane body.

Listen to what the Lord did; then, what He said.

When the people of the Hebrews were bringing the Ark of the Lord back to Jerusalem, from the house of Abinadab to the Israelites; Uzzah, who touched the side of the Ark with an unexplored conscience, was killed;

and yet he did not approach to take anything from it, but to steady it as it was slipping from the oxen 
(2 Samuel 6)
.

So great was the care for divine reverence that it did not tolerate bold hands, even for assistance.

The same Lord cries out and says: "All the clean shall eat the flesh, but the soul that touches any unclean thing shall be cut off from the people" 
(Leviticus 7:12)
.

Are these things ancient and no longer happening now?

What then?

Has God ceased to care for us; has He withdrawn beyond the sight of the world and does He see no one from heaven?

Or is His patience ignorance?

Far from it, you will say.

Therefore, He sees what we do, but certainly waits and endures, and grants time for repentance, and allows Christ to delay, so that those whom He redeemed do not perish quickly.

Well, you sinner, understand: you are watched by the Lord, you can please Him if you wish.

But is it an old rule that the unclean are not allowed to approach the table of God?

Look at the Apostles and understand the new.

In the First Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul writes: "Whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the Lord" 
(First Corinthians 11:27)
.

Further down: "For those who eat and drink without discerning the body of Christ eat and drink judgment on themselves.

That is why many among you are weak and sick, and a number of you have fallen asleep.

But if we were more discerning with regard to ourselves, we would not come under such judgment.

Nevertheless, when we are judged in this way by the Lord, we are being disciplined so that we will not be finally condemned with the world" 
(First Corinthians 11:29-32)
.

Did you tremble, or not?

"Will be guilty," he says, "of the body and blood of the Lord."

A human soul guilty could not be absolved; does the violator of the Lord's body escape?

"For those who eat and drink without discerning the body of Christ eat and drink judgment on themselves."

Wake up, sinner; fear the present judgment in your heart if you have done such a thing.

"That is why many among you are weak and sick, and a number of you have fallen asleep."

Now if anyone does not fear the future, let him at least fear present illness and present death.

"But if we were more discerning with regard to ourselves, we would not come under such judgment.

Nevertheless, when we are judged in this way by the Lord, we are being disciplined so that we will not be finally condemned with the world."

Rejoice, sinner, if in this world you are intercepted by death or consumed by illness, so that you are not punished after this world.

Understand how much crime he commits who comes to the altar unworthy; for whom it is counted a remedy when he is either afflicted by illness or dissolved by death.

But if your soul is cheap to you; spare the people, spare the priests.

The Apostle cries out: "A little leaven leavens the whole batch of dough" 
(First Corinthians 5:6)
.

What will you do?

You, because of whom the entire group is corrupted; because of whom the entire brotherhood is troubled? Will you live, guilty of so many souls? Will you be excused when the innocent blame you for their communion, when the Church calls you the author of its disaster? Behold, again the Apostle to the priest: 
 "Do not be quick to lay hands on anyone, nor share in the sins of others" 
(First Timothy 5:22)
.

What will you do, you who deceive the priest? Who either deceive the ignorant, or confuse the one not fully knowing through the difficulty of proving? I ask you, therefore, brothers, for my own peril, by the Lord who does not miss hidden things, stop covering a wounded conscience.

Wise patients do not fear doctors, even if they will cut, even if they will burn, even in the hidden parts of the body. We remember some who did not feel ashamed even of their hidden and modest parts, endured the knife and burning, and that severe biting powder. And how much is that which men have endured?

Will the sinner be afraid? Will the sinner be ashamed, to buy eternal life with present shame? And will he hide poorly covered wounds from the Lord offering his hands? And does he have something to be ashamed of in him who has offended the Lord? Or is it better for him to perish, so you, timid with shame, do not die without shame, not making room for shame, and gain more from his loss for whom it is better to perish for you?

But if you are ashamed before the eyes of the brothers; do not fear those who share your misfortunes. No body rejoices in the torment of its own members; it equally suffers and works together for the remedy. In one and the other, there is the Church; and in the Church, Christ. And therefore, whoever does not hide his sins from the brothers, assisted by the tears of the Church, is absolved by the prayers of Christ.

Now let the speech be to those who, well and wisely, confessing their wounds in the name of penance; neither know what penance is, nor what the medicine for wounds is; and are like those who indeed open their wounds and swellings, and even confess with doctors present; but, when advised what should be applied, neglect it; and what should be drunk, they disdain. Which is like if someone says: Behold I am sick, behold I am wounded, but I do not want to heal my stomach. This was, but see what is more foolish. A disease is also added to the cause, and a wound is joined, and contrary things are applied, dangerous things are drunk. By this greatest evil, this brotherhood suffers, adding new sins to old faults.

Therefore, it has broken out more severely into vice, already tortured by the most pernicious decay. What therefore shall I do now as the priest who is compelled to heal? It is late in such cases. Nevertheless, if there is anyone among you who can endure cutting and burning, I still can. Behold the prophetic scalpel: 
 "Return to the Lord your God," he says, 
 "with fasting, and weeping, and mourning, and rend your hearts" 
(Joel 2:12-13)
.

Do not fear this cutting, dearest ones. David endured it, he lay in filthy ashes, further deformed by a horrifying sackcloth. He who was once accustomed to gems and purples, covered his soul in fasting: to whom the seas, the forests, the rivers served, and the earth bearing the promised riches; wet with tears, he consumed those eyes with which he had seen the glory of God, and confessed himself unhappy and miserable, the father of Mary, even the ruler of the Jewish empire. That Babylonian king, working confession, is melted by a seven-year squalor. In him the manes of lions, unkempt hair, and barbaric horror surpass; and with long curved nails his terrifying hands resemble eagles as he, like an ox, ate grass, a ruminator of pale herbs.

This punishment, however, commends him to God, and restores him to his former kingdom. Men feared him, but God received him, made joyful by the calamity of that ill treatment. Behold the cutting I promised: whoever can endure it, will be healed. I will bring even more fire from the apostolic cautery: let us see if you can bear it. 
 "I have judged," he says, 
 "with you assembled and my spirit, in the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord" 
(First Corinthians 5:3-5)
.

What do you say, penitents? Where is your flesh?

Destruction? Or is it that in your repentance, you always walk around more refined, stuffed from feasts, polished from baths, dressed up?

Here, I see someone sometimes humble, sometimes poor, sometimes in a cheap, dirty tunic; now well-dressed and wealthy, and handsome, as if they blame God for not being able to serve Him, and refresh their dying soul with bodily pleasures.

It’s good that we are moderate; otherwise, we would do what some shamelessly do, covering themselves with marble, being crushed by gold, flowing with silk, glowing with scarlet. If any rusty dust shone on your eyebrows, or artificial brightness glistened on your cheeks, or forced redness sweated on your lips: perhaps you don’t have these. However, you do have gardeners or seaside retreats, finer wine, more sumptuous feasts, and the cleansing of old age.

Is that how you act, is that how you believe, while you live? I can’t bear it anymore, brothers.

Daniel, covered with sackcloth and ashes, pale from fasting, says this: We have sinned, committed crimes, acted wickedly, and transgressed your commandments and judgments 
Daniel
 9:5.

Similarly, the divine scripture about Azariah says: Standing, Azariah prayed and, opening his mouth, made confession to God along with his companions 
Daniel
 3:25.

David himself said: I will wash my bed every night, I will soak my couch with tears 
Psalm
 6:6.

But we, what have we done similar? I won’t even mention the things we gather up in heaps, through trading, buying, and seizing; seeking profits outside, and lusts inside; doing nothing simply, giving nothing to the poor, forgiving nothing to our brothers.

Not even the things that can be seen by a priest and praised by a bishop as a witness; not even these daily practices do we keep; weeping before the Church, mourning a lost life in dirty clothes, fasting, praying, groveling: if someone invites you to the bath, refuse the pleasures: if someone invites you to a feast, say: These are for the fortunate, I have sinned against the Lord, and I am at risk of perishing forever: why do I need feasts when I have offended the Lord?

Hold the hands of the poor, plead with widows, grovel before priests, beg the praying Church, try everything before you perish.

I know some of your brothers and sisters cover their chest with sackcloth, lie down in ashes, meditate on late fasts; and perhaps they haven’t even sinned as much. Why talk about the brothers? Wild goats, as they say, know their own remedies: I hear that, pierced by poisoned arrows, they wander the Dictaean woods until, cutting off a stem of dittany, they shake off the arrows from their bodies with the healing juice of its sap.

We repel the fiery darts of the devil with no juice of repentance, no herb of confession. The swallow knows how to restore the eyes of its blind chicks with its own celandine: we, losing the light of our minds, will not cure it with any root of harsh treatment?

Look, neither like goats nor swallows, humanity does not envy its own blindness and pain. Consider now, brothers, what we promised in the end: what is the fruit of these works; or conversely, what outcome follows.

To sinners who are delicate and do not repent, the Spirit of the Lord threatens and says: They did not receive the love of the truth so that they might be saved: and for this reason, God will send them a powerful delusion so that they will believe the lie, so that all may be judged who did not believe the truth but found pleasure in unrighteousness 
Second
 Thessalonians 2:10-11.

Likewise, Revelation speaks about the prostitute: In the same measure that she glorified herself and lived luxuriously, give her that much torment and grief 
Revelation
 18:7.

And the Apostle Paul: Or do you despise the riches of His kindness, forbearance, and patience, not realizing that God’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance? But because of your stubbornness and unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath against yourself for the day of God’s wrath, when His righteous judgment will be revealed 
Romans
 2:4-5.

Therefore, fear, beloved, the just judgments: abandon error, condemn luxuries: the end time is already approaching: Tartarus and Gehenna open their loosened depths to the wicked. After timely punishments of souls, eternal punishment is also reserved for resurrected bodies. No one should believe in the liver of Tityus and the vulture of poets. He himself prepares the matter for the rekindling of bodies.

Eternal salvation.

Pay attention, if you do not believe: the rush of waters that burns with fire will be replenished by punishment. If you are drawn back from torture by confession, remember the hell that confession will extinguish for you.

Consider its power even from present circumstances; some of its fumes cook the greatest mountains with underground fires. 
Etna
 in Sicily and Vesuvius in Campania burn with relentless balls of flame. To prove to us the eternity of judgment, they erupt and consume themselves, yet are never finished in any age.

Pay attention in the Gospel to the rich man suffering the torments of his soul alone. What kind of punishment will there be when bodies are restored? What will be the grinding of teeth? What will be the weeping of eyes?

Remember, brothers, that in hell there is no confession; nor can repentance be granted then, the time for repentance having passed. As it is written in Ecclesiastes chapter nine, verse ten, and Sirach chapter fourteen, verse seventeen: "Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with your might, for there is no work or thought or knowledge or wisdom in Sheol, to which you are going."

Hurry, while you are alive, while you are on the way with your adversary. Behold, we fear worldly fires, and we dread the claws of executioners: compare these with the eternal hands of tormentors and the tips of flames that never die.

I implore you by the faith of the Church, brothers: by my concern, by the common souls of all I beseech and entreat you: do not be ashamed in this work; do not hesitate to seize the timely remedies of salvation as soon as possible, to cast down your spirit with sorrow, to cover your body with sackcloth, to sprinkle ashes, to be afflicted with fasting, to be overcome with grief, to be aided by the prayers of many.

As much as you did not spare your own punishment, so much will God spare you. For He is kind and patient, and full of compassion, and who can change the sentence imposed against malice, as written in Joel chapter two, verse thirteen according to the Septuagint: "Return to the Lord your God, for he is gracious and compassionate, slow to anger and abounding in love, and he relents from sending calamity."

Behold, I promise, I pledge, if you return to your Father with true satisfaction, erring no more, adding nothing to past sins, even saying something humble and tearful, "We have sinned in your sight, Father; we are no longer worthy to be called your sons" as in Luke chapter fifteen, verse twenty-two: immediately that unclean beast will depart from you, and the deformed food of husks.

Immediately, returning, you will be clothed with a robe, and honored with a ring, and again received with a fatherly embrace. Behold, He Himself speaks: "I do not desire the death of the sinner, but that he should turn back and live" as written in Ezekiel chapter eighteen, verse twenty-three, and chapter thirty-three, verse eleven.

And again: "Does not one who falls rise again; and does not one who turns away return?" as mentioned in Jeremiah chapter eight, verse four. And the Apostle says: "God is able to make him stand" in Romans chapter fourteen, verse four.

The Apocalypse also threatens the seven Churches unless they repent. Indeed, He would not threaten those who do not repent unless He forgives those who do repent. Even God Himself says: "Remember from where you have fallen, and repent" as written in Revelation chapter two, verse five.

And again: "When you groan in repentance, then you will be saved, and you will know where you have been" as in Isaiah chapter thirty, verse fifteen according to the Septuagint.

No one should despair so much over the vileness of a sinful soul as to believe himself no longer needed by God. The Lord does not want any of us to perish: even the small and insignificant are sought after.

If you do not believe, look: behold in the Gospel, the lost coin is sought, and when found is shown to the neighbors. The little sheep, to be carried back on the shoulders, is not a burden to the shepherd. The angels in heaven rejoice over one sinner who repents, and the heavenly chorus exults.

Hey, you sinner, do not stop praying: see where your return is rejoiced over. Amen.