
by Pope Innocent III
Patrologia Latina Volume 


Dialogue Between God and a Sinner. Editorial Notice.

I discovered another work by Innocent in the Vatican Library, inserted in Palatine manuscript three hundred sixty-five, inscribed as Dialogue of Innocent the Third Between God and a Sinner. I do not know whether he wrote this dialogue before or after becoming pope, for Innocent does not speak about himself in it, but rather presents the character of any sinner whatsoever speaking with God. No one should be surprised that this dialogue is not mentioned in the Gesta, for many other writings of Innocent, both published and unpublished, were unknown to the author of the Gesta.
Let the Christian Church therefore receive from us this literary work of the great pontiff, which, while it demonstrates the deeply religious spirit of its author, equally stirs the piety of readers and urgently commends the reform of their conduct.

Dialogue Between God and a Sinner

Because the merciful and compassionate Lord, dearest brothers, permits—indeed, welcomes—being called upon by wretched mortals, boldness rises even in me, though I am unworthy and a sinner, to cry out to God with a loud voice and to invoke his mercy.
Let it not be burdensome to you, since with the Lord's help it may prove beneficial toward the fruit of repentance, that I establish in the hearing of your charity a kind of conversation between a sinner and God, like a dialogue.
For the Most High does not disdain such conversations with his servants, as Job says to him, 'Speak and I will answer you, or else I will speak and you answer me,' from the book of Job, chapter thirteen. With him therefore watching from heaven and dwelling in the heights of his glory, as the unchangeable God in whom there is no variation or shadow of alteration, while I lie prostrate on the earth and humbly cling to the ground, I will all the more fittingly take on the character of the sinner in this conversation, inasmuch as I confess and acknowledge that I am more guilty and blameworthy, more defiled and sinful than others.
Beginning therefore and opening the desire of my mind, I speak to him with these words:

The Sinner to God

Eternal God, whose nature is goodness and whose work is mercy, who even when angry will remember mercy—with what words will I be able to invoke you worthily, so that you may mercifully deign to hear the one calling upon you?
I know that my Redeemer, your Son, the teacher of truth and wisdom, when one of his disciples said to him, 'Lord, teach me to pray,' replied, 'Say: Our Father who art in heaven,' from the Gospel of Luke, chapter eleven. If therefore, Lord, I invoke you by praying in this way, will I be able to obtain the fulfillment in me of that word proven by your faithful prophet?

God to the Sinner

Certainly my Son, who is consubstantial and coeternal with me, taught you to pray in this way. But because you do not present yourself to me as a son, you cannot worthily invoke me as father in that prayer.
For the prophet speaks in my person: 'If I am Father, where is my honor?' from the prophet Malachi, chapter one. But if you loved me as Father—you, the human being whom I created—you would keep my commandments as a son who loves his father. For the demonstration of works is the proof of love.
But as I consider every kind of human being and every condition of those living in the flesh, rarely do I encounter—among prelates and subjects, among kings and ministers, among monastics and those under vows, among lords and servants, among clerics and laity—anyone who fulfills my will by carrying out my commandments and shows me the love of a son toward a father.
Every sex and every age has corrupted its way, going after its own desires while despising the entire evangelical tradition and teaching.

The Sinner to God

Your knowledge has become too wonderful for me, Lord, and I cannot attain it. You close my mouth and block me with your arguments, so that I dare not rush forward to invoke you with the words of that prayer.
'Yet I will speak to my Lord, though I am dust and ashes,' from the book of Genesis, chapter eighteen. I will change my words, in case my invocation may be found worthy in your hearing. I will adopt for invoking you that prayer of your faithful prophet David, to whom you gave testimony saying, 'I have found a man after my own heart,' from Psalm eighty-eight.
For praying in this way, I will cry out to you, Lord: 'Have mercy on me.' And likewise I said, 'Lord, have mercy on me,' and elsewhere, 'Have mercy on me, Lord, and hear my prayer,' from Psalm four.

God to the Sinner

That prayer does not sound right in your mouth, because you do not regard me as Lord, because you do not fear me as a servant ought to fear his master, though you cannot deny that you are my servant.
I, who spoke through the prophet against the sons of disobedience, 'If I am Father, where is my honor?'—through the same prophet I cried out against servants who are without fear: 'If I am Lord, where is my fear?'—both from the prophet Malachi, chapter one.
But that you do not fear me, or do not regard me as Lord, I easily prove to you. For if you were in some secret place alone with a woman whom you greatly desired, prepared and greatly inflamed toward her to fulfill bodily lust, would you not, if someone whom you feared burst in, immediately abandon the deed begun and flee in fear of him, or at least, lest you be seen by him—out of shame and fear or embarrassment—if you could, would you not rush to some hiding place?
But for my sake you do not refrain from doing such things even before nearby eyes, though you know that it displeases me and that I forbid you to do it. For the prophet says concerning me, 'Am I a God at hand?' from the prophet Jeremiah, chapter twenty-three. Behold, I am a God afar off. If a man hides himself, shall I not see him?
From this you are proven to fear him more than me—indeed, to dread him as lord, though he is like you, a mortal and corruptible human being—while you are shown to despise me, who am almighty and eternal, and whether you wish it or not, your Lord. Therefore it is not fitting for you to invoke me by saying, 'Lord, have mercy.'

The Sinner to God

You convict me, Lord, clearly, and you conclude your argument irrefutably. In this situation, when I, a human being who am rottenness, and a son of man who am a worm, speak to my Lord, there comes to my mind, Lord, that prayer of the sinner and tax collector which you mercifully accepted, when praying in the temple and unwilling to lift his eyes to heaven, he beat his breast saying, 'God, be merciful to me, a sinner,' from the Gospel of Luke, chapter eighteen.
Following his example and with similar words I will cry out to you, in case you might hear one invoking you in this way and be merciful to my sin, for it is great.

God to the Sinner

If I am the Lord your God, which I alone certainly am, you seem to be calling upon me in complete mockery by using the words of that prayer to invoke me, since there is something other than me that you worship as God, toward which you principally direct your affection. For that is your god which is more loved by you.
For if you are greedy, you worship and love money as an idolater worships God. For avarice, as my apostle testifies, 'is the service of idols,' from Paul's letter to the Ephesians, chapter five. If you are a belly-worshiper or glutton, your belly is your god, because you care about those things that most inflame the appetite of the belly. The same apostle says, 'These are the ones whose god is their belly,' from Paul's letter to the Philippians, chapter three.
Therefore, if you have another god besides me—namely, that vice which you love more than me, who am the true God—you will not worthily invoke me to be merciful to you.
Indeed, it seems that you would be mocking me and invoking God ironically if, while rendering to another the worship and love due to me, you cried out to me, 'God, be merciful to me, a sinner'—since this foolish notion is contrary to Scripture, which says, 'God is not mocked,' from Paul's letter to the Galatians, chapter six.
But you act like an adulteress who, having on one side her legitimate husband, receives her lover on the other side. For you despise me—who am your spouse—like a shameless prostitute, and you exclude me from the bridal chamber of your soul, where I should rest with you in delightful and holy love, because my delight is to be with the children of humanity.
Not without injury to me, you bring in the devil like an external lover to indulge with him in your lusts and desires. To such persons Scripture truly says, 'The bed is so narrow that one of the two must fall off,' from the prophet Isaiah, chapter twenty-eight.
Therefore I leave the bed and withdraw from you, because the soul, clinging shamelessly to another in its fornications, has abandoned me, the husband of its maturity, to whom it should have clung inseparably.
Moreover, when do you think you can invoke me so that I will answer you, when I am not in you? Why do you pass by with closed eyes? And why do you not pay attention to the force of that word which the prophet sets forth, namely, 'You will call, and the Lord will hear you,' from the prophet Isaiah, chapter fifty-eight? For to invoke means, as it were, to pray inwardly—that is, to cry out to him who is within.
Certainly, if you were to cry out by knocking frequently at the door of a house in which no one was present, you could cry out all day long, and because no one would be inside to hear you, no one would respond to you crying out, however loudly and frequently.
So it is with me. Since I have left the dwelling of your soul, from which you compelled me to depart because of its filth, having been made far from you I cannot now hear the cry of your voice, much less should I favorably hear you while you do things that displease me.

The Sinner to God

What then, most merciful Lord, shall I do so that you may return to me, from whom—alas!—you have distanced yourself because of my iniquities? So that, being thus within, you may answer one who invokes you, and I may be saved, I who had been abandoned by you, since it is written, 'Salvation is far from sinners,' from Psalm one hundred eighteen.

God to the Sinner

Hear the counsel of sacred Scripture, and if you do it, you will immediately bring me back to your dwelling so that I may hear you when you invoke me. Have contrition of heart and grieve strongly because you have offended me with your sins, according to what the prophet says to you and those like you: 'Rend your hearts and not your garments,' from the prophet Joel, chapter two. Likewise, 'The Lord is near to the brokenhearted, and he will save the humble in spirit,' from Psalm thirty-three.
In that very contrition, resolve firmly to confess your sins truthfully to a priest, as the prophet David says: 'I said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and you forgave the iniquity of my sin,' from Psalm thirty-one.
In this you can clearly understand how great and how incomparable is my mercy, which at such a resolution forgives and remits all crimes.
When opportunity is granted to you to confess, the prophet says and cries out, 'You declare your iniquities, that you may be justified,' from the prophet Isaiah, chapter forty-three. The apostle says the same: 'Confess your sins to one another,' from the letter of James, chapter five.
But also my Son, as the angel of great counsel, came to save his people from their sins. He commanded confession—which his apostle expressly prescribed—both symbolically and figuratively when he commanded those cured of bodily leprosy by him, 'Go and show yourselves to the priests,' from the Gospel of Luke, chapter seventeen. Through this he indicated that the penitent who is contrite with the intention of confessing is cleansed from the filth of sins, from leprosy in the soul as it were. Because temporal punishments remain as debts, they should humbly approach the sacrament of confession, devoutly commit themselves to the judgment of priests, and make satisfaction in deed according to what the priests command.

The Sinner to God

Great and ineffable, Lord, is the power of contrition, through which you justify the ungodly and marvelously make good from evil. But I, a sinner, cannot merit it, and unless through the infusion of your grace, I will not be able to obtain it in any way.
For what that contrition is I do not know, but that it is a gift of your grace alone I do not fail to recognize, from whom, as from the Father of lights, descends every best gift and every perfect gift, from the letter of James, chapter one.
Why then, Lord, do you require of me that I make myself good through contrition, when I cannot make myself such? Since also, as one guilty and defiled, I cannot merit it except through the inestimable grace of your mercy.

God to the Sinner

Do not err or deceive yourself. For I do not require of you that you make yourself good—something which I know you cannot do, since this is in me—but that by applying your free will to me and meditating on divine benefits, you make yourself suitable to me.
If you do this—since this is within you—you will undoubtedly receive the infusion of my grace, which I am always ready to give from my goodness to anyone who effectively wills to receive it. Although that suitability precedes the infusion of my grace in the sinner not from merit but from congruity.
Whence Augustine says: 'Something precedes in sinners who, although they are not justified, are nevertheless found worthy of justification and suitable.'
So it is with one who has closed eyes. Nothing is required for them to see except only what is within his power to do—namely, to open his eyes—since the brightness of the sun is prepared outside, which will immediately illuminate the opened eyes for seeing.
By this example, consider clearly that divine grace is prepared to infuse itself into a person; only the congruity of suitability in him is required, found through the application of free will.

The Sinner Speaks to God

I clearly recognize, Lord, that the unfathomable depth of your knowledge wonderfully instructs and teaches me. Therefore I will carefully meditate on your kindnesses, most gracious God, by which you have bound me to yourself in many ways. I direct my understanding and apply myself feebly as best I can, like parched earth turning toward you, hoping that through such reflections you might find me suitable, Father of mercies, and graciously pour into me the dew of your grace which I have not deserved. With this help I might be awakened to goodness and sufficiently crushed in heart over the wicked deeds I have committed, with the intention of humbly confessing them.
Yet this very meditation on your kindnesses cannot arise in my mind without you, as the Apostle says in his second letter to the Corinthians, chapter three: we are not sufficient to think anything as coming from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from God. But what shall I do, miserable as I am? For though I am stirred by your grace and often resolve to confess, many things come up that hinder me and draw me back from carrying out my intention.
The first obstacle is the great shame that weighs on me all day long, and the confusion of my face that has covered me. I resolve many times to approach a priest, but because what I have done is deeply shameful, I turn away from such a resolution out of embarrassment. Many times I have determined to go to a priest, and I have gone intending to reveal my sin devotedly, but when I stood at his feet, my conscience prodding me, sudden confusion rushed over me. My spirit began to waver in turmoil within itself, saying: What shall I do? Shall I report this crime? Will I be able to tell it? And so with shame prevailing in me, confession postponed, I left the tribunal of penance without the medicine of salvation. The wounds in my soul became corrupted and grew worse because of my foolishness.

God Speaks to the Sinner

You are shown to be extremely foolish and lacking in judgment when you change like the moon and abandon confessing your sins out of embarrassment and shame. It is praiseworthy if you are confused and shame invades you when you recall your crimes to memory, as the prophet Jeremiah says in chapter thirty-one: I was ashamed and I blushed, because I bore the reproach of my youth. But you must be entirely careful that your shame not be of the kind that draws you back from confessing sin, because such confusion increases guilt rather than diminishing it, since it does not allow the penitent to uncover through confession what he has committed.
There is a shame that brings glory, and there is a shame that brings guilt. For it is blameworthy if it excludes confession, but praiseworthy if the shame is such that it accompanies confession. Indeed, to expose sin without any embarrassment is a sign of boasting rather than devotion. But why, foolish one, are you ashamed to say once what you were not ashamed to commit repeatedly? Yet speak beforehand if you are tempted, and say: I will not be ashamed to confess to God through his minister, who is a mortal man like myself, what cannot be hidden from the eyes of his majesty. I will not be ashamed to expose my guilt to a man in this present life, because if I do not reveal it to him, I know it will be made manifest to everyone on the day of judgment. But if I reveal it here, God will cover it and hide it out of his immeasurable goodness, and will make me one of the blessed, as the psalm says in chapter thirty-one, whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered.

The Sinner Speaks to God

You have strengthened me, Lord, with your words and fortified me with holy teachings, and I will no longer hold back out of shame when I approach your minister to reveal my transgressions through confession. But there is something else, my Lord, that presents a great obstacle to my confessing: namely, fear of punishment. I have sinned, Lord, beyond the number of the sand of the sea, and my sins have multiplied. Therefore I am very afraid to approach confession, because if the amount of punishment must be imposed according to the amount of guilt, I could be weighed down by such a burden of satisfaction, which ought to be imposed on me according to the assessment of my offenses, that even if I lived for a very long time, I would be unable in my wretchedness to complete it.

God Speaks to the Sinner

Your foolishness still does not desert you, and an unwise opinion has risen in your heart. You must never believe that God commands the impossible for a human being, or that he orders a punishment imposed on you that you cannot bear. My vicar the pope, whom I have established in my place on earth as your judge, will mitigate the pain of one who confesses, taking into account the circumstances of the sins. And because he has received from me the power of binding and loosing alike, in ministry though not in authority, he will moderate the punishment according to the judgment of his discretion, and will impose such penance that through it, with my cooperation, you may receive growth in righteousness. He will also be able to find in you such sorrow, bitterness, and vehemence of contrition that afterward you may presume the greatest part or perhaps even all of the imposed punishment will be relaxed through the goodness of God.
But you, whom fear of present punishment draws back from the intention of confessing, why do you not consider and turn over in your mind that the punishment of this life, however long it may be, is brief compared to eternal punishment? However bitter it may be, it is sweet when compared to the punishment of hell. Therefore it is better for you to do penance here than to be tortured unbearably and most bitterly afterward. May what the book of Job says in chapter six not happen to you: He who fears the frost, hail will fall upon him. And he who fears temporal punishment will undoubtedly incur eternal punishment. Likewise, as Job says in chapter twenty: He will flee from weapons of iron and fall into a bow of bronze. Indeed, present punishment, which quickly passes and is consumed, is designated by iron weapons, which are consumed by rust. But eternal punishment, which cannot be finished, is signified by a bronze bow, for bronze is incorruptible.
Yet penance is most fruitful in this world, but completely unfruitful, indeed destructive, in the next. That word of the Apostle should also provide you consolation and strongly encourage you to endure temporal punishment, where Paul says in his letter to the Romans, chapter eight: The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the future glory that will be revealed in us. Likewise, this light and momentary affliction of ours works for us a sublime weight in eternity.

The Sinner Speaks to God

Your words are delightful to your servant, Lord, sweeter than honey and the honeycomb to my mouth, as psalm one hundred eighteen says, though I am unworthy to look upon such heights. Do not disdain still, I beg, to bear with a little more of my foolishness. Behold, Lord, shame over my guilt or fear of punishment will no longer hinder confession in me. But there is something else that delays me a little, or rather draws my heart back from confession: namely, affection for or desire of temporal things. I consider within myself and speak to my mind: If I confess my offenses to a priest, perhaps he will order me to journey to Jerusalem, or undertake the labor of some pilgrimage, or at least visit churches and spend much time in them devoted to frequent prayers. Meanwhile I could be pursuing worldly profits and increasing the substance of this world for myself and my family through many acquisitions. But if I have anything with me, it will need to diminish rather than increase while an undertaken pilgrimage must be completed, or as long as I happen to be occupied with spiritual exercises. Therefore it is more useful for me to desist from confession than to hinder my pursuit of worldly gain.

God Speaks to the Sinner

That thought is vain, indeed it is a temptation of Satan that has seized you. But to drive that thought far from you, remember what the gospel Scripture proclaims in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter twenty-four: Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing in that day. Indeed, perverse souls are pregnant, which conceive in their minds through illicit desires for temporal things or consent to some wickedness, as if by a seed of malice injected by the devil. But nursing souls are called those who do not cease through greed to heap up earthly pleasures, or who, persevering delightfully in the iniquities they have perpetrated, delay repenting.
Death will undoubtedly come upon them, and they will descend into hell alive, because wickedness is in their dwellings and in the midst of their minds. Certainly if you were truly wise, when these worldly things stir you to desire them, you ought to meditate on the fact that whatever seems desirable in the world is transitory, but what is promised by God is eternal. These things are earthly, those are heavenly. These are small, those are great. These are false, those are certain. These are lowest, those are highest. These are minimal, those are maximal. These are acquired with labor, preserved with fear and anxiety, and lost with pain and distress. But although there is labor in acquiring those heavenly things, because as the Gospel of Matthew says in chapter eleven, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence and the violent take it by force, nevertheless their possessors can in no way be pricked by the sting of anxieties about guarding them, nor tortured by pain over their loss or destruction, because as the Gospel of Matthew says in chapter six, there neither rust nor moth destroys, nor do thieves break in and steal.

The Sinner Addresses God. Do not be angry, Lord, if once again this worthless creature dares to speak boldly in the presence of your majesty. Just as in other matters, may I find counsel from the depths of your wisdom in what I am about to propose, even though I stand here troubled and confused.

There is something that deeply troubles me and creates a greater obstacle to confession than anything else. It fills me with despair because resisting sin seems impossibly difficult. I remember, miserable as I am, how many times I have fallen. Afterward, with your help, I repented and got back up, but I couldn't stay standing. I relapsed and returned to the same sins over and over again, like a dog returning to its vomit and a pig to wallowing in mud, as Peter's second letter describes. Since I am as slippery and unstable as wax, easily bent toward vice, I despair of ever being stable. That's why I completely stop confessing. I think to myself, what's the point of being lifted up and rising again if I'm just going to fall down soon afterward? I have no confidence that I can stand even for a brief period. And I think I can't easily obtain forgiveness when I'm repeatedly lifted up and repeatedly fall back into sin. The one who lifts me up must find me ungrateful and lacking devotion.

God Addresses the Sinner. In what you're now proposing, you prove yourself not so much foolish as actually insane. You're right to distrust yourself and recognize your fragility. You're right not to presume on your own strength and to think that after you've risen, you cannot hope in your own power to stay standing.

But you must hope in me. Even though you are weak and feeble in yourself, I can, if I choose in my mercy, stabilize you no matter how weak you are and strengthen you no matter how frail, so that you won't collapse. Why would you despair of me? As the prophet Ezekiel in chapter eighteen tells us, I do not want the death of a sinner but rather that he should turn back and live. I am indeed merciful and ready to forgive wickedness. Pay attention, because if you despair of me, you commit the unforgivable sin, which is the sin against the Holy Spirit. No sin compares to this one, because it alone is believed to be unforgivable both in this age and in the age to come. Understand this: if you despair of me, you offend me all the more gravely because you're trying to extinguish my power and take away from me my kindness, which I possess not as some accidental gift but as part of my very nature. You're attempting to separate my omnipotence from me. I am the one of whom it is said: God, whose very nature is always to show mercy and to spare. I am the one to whom the assembly of the faithful cries out: God, you reveal your omnipotence most clearly by showing mercy and compassion. Why, miserable one, should you despair of me? I consider it joy for myself and my angels when even one sinner repents. I left ninety-nine sheep in the wilderness and sent their shepherd to seek the one that was lost, and when he found it, he carried it on his shoulders. I joyfully welcomed back the prodigal son when he returned. I gave him the finest robe and a ring. I threw a great feast for him and killed the fattened calf, as Luke's Gospel in chapter fifteen recounts. I am like a mother who opens her heart of compassion even to children who have done wrong. I patiently endure those who offend me many times throughout their entire lives, and I wait patiently, delaying punishment so they might repent.
The prophet cries out about me, saying in the book of Isaiah chapter forty-six: Listen, house of Jacob and remnant of Israel, you whom I have carried from the womb, whom I have borne from birth. I have made you and I will bear you. Even to your gray hairs I will carry you. Why should you despair of me? After I created humanity to make them sharers in my glory, out of the immense love with which I loved them, I sent my only-begotten Son into the world. He redeemed humanity, sold into slavery under sin, not with perishable gold and silver but with his own precious blood, which he poured out abundantly. Know this and see it clearly, you who refuse to confess because you keep repeating the very same sins you've often confessed before, and you've shamefully corrupted your ways. While it is evil and bitter to abandon the Lord your God, it is far worse to persist in evil, to push aside his love, to continually distance yourself from him and turn your face away from him. Why don't you consider this: you fall often and you rise often. Isn't it less evil to fall and rise alternately than to remain continuously in sin? Through God's kindness, when you rise like this, death might catch you in a good state at that moment, and you would be saved. But if you persist in sin and are found perverted at the end of your life, without doubt you will be carried off to eternal punishment and condemnation. As Scripture says in Psalm ninety-five, the Lord judges the ends of the earth and final deeds. A tree that has fallen, whether to the north or to the south, would, I believe, prefer to be pulled out of the mud first and then fall again rather than remain stuck in it permanently.
Similarly, someone suffering from a fever would surely consider it worse to endure it continuously than to be troubled by it intermittently. In the same way, faced with two evils, namely falling into sin and then rising from it, or persisting in evil irreversibly and irreverently, you should flee the second rather than the first. So don't hold back from confession as though distrusting and despairing of God. Instead, whenever you suffer the misery of committing again what you've already confessed, confess those same things again. Just as water, whenever it washes a garment that has been soiled many times, cleanses it from dirt and makes it almost like new, so too confession, whenever you return to it, restores to your soul the beauty of purity that it loses through repeated sin. When you confess your sin and expel the poison of wickedness from your soul through the antidote of confession, I will immediately return to your soul as to my own house from which I previously departed. And from that point on, if you call upon me, I will hear you, and dwelling within you I will respond without delay to the one who cries out.
The Sinner Responds. Lord God of my salvation, the words you speak are words of eternal life, and the guidance you offer brings healing. Helped by you, therefore, I will devoutly seek out your minister. I will pour out my heart before him like water. I will open my lips in his presence and speak in the bitterness of my soul. Like someone who puts a finger down their throat, I will thoroughly examine my conscience and will not stop until I vomit out the corruption of my sins, which lies hidden within, more bitter than wormwood and gall. When this rottenness is vomited out and expelled, whose abominable stench had caused you to leave the dwelling place of my mind, may you mercifully deign to return and dwell there with the immeasurable fragrance of your ointments, according to your holy and ineffable promise. You who are blessed forever and ever. Amen.