Chapter Four

Against 
Cassianus
 it is proven that the desire for health cannot be had without grace. 

Cassianus
's fourth definition: The beginnings of good wills sometimes come from the good of nature. Refuted, both from his first definition and from the Apostle, whose passage, "For to will is present with me," is vindicated from a wrong interpretation.

Then, to define more clearly what man has from free will and what he receives from God's grace, you add and say: 

For no one enjoys health whenever they want, nor are they freed from the disease of illness according to their own will.

You thus teach that a man cannot grasp health by himself but has the desire for health from himself, and that he comes to the doctor by his own will alone; that this coming is not also from the doctor. 

As if the soul itself does not languish and does not seek a remedy for its own body. 

But the whole man, from and with the soul itself, falls into the depth of his own misery, where it pleases him to lie before he receives knowledge of his calamity from the doctor, always loving his errors and embracing falsehoods instead of truths. 

The first step to his salvation is that he begins to displease himself and hates the old weakness of his condition: the next is that he desires to be healed and knows by whom he should be healed (see response to the 6 objections of the Gauls). 

These precede his healing in such a way that they are instilled in him by the one who is going to heal him: so that, since these things cannot be present in him in vain, he seems to be saved by merit, not by grace.

Then you add: 
To make it clearer, the beginnings of good wills sometimes come from the good of nature, which is granted by the Creator, but they cannot reach the completion of virtues unless they are directed by God. 

The Apostle is a witness, saying: For to will is present with me, but to perform what is good I do not find.

Therefore, according to this definition, you falsely said before that not only the beginnings of good acts but also of good thoughts are from God; who both begins what is good and carries it out and completes it in us. 

But this can in no way be false in any part: contrary ideas ought not to have been inferred; what you rightly professed to begin from grace, you later confirmed that we have it through the good of nature and free will. 

The blessed Apostle indeed said: For to will is present with me, but to perform what is good I do not find, Romans 7:18. 

But he also said: Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think of anything as being from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from God. 

And he also said: For it is God who works in you both to will and to do, Philippians 2:13.

The apostle writes to us, on your behalf, to work for the good will 
Philippians
 2:13.

Therefore, the apostle is not contradicting himself.

But when the good will has been granted to us, we do not immediately find the ability to act, unless we ask, seek, and knock.

The one who gave the desire also provides the fulfillment.

The voice of the one saying: "For the desire to do what is good is with me, but I cannot carry it out" 
Romans
 7:18, is that of someone called, and already under grace: who delights in God's law according to the inner self, but sees another law at work in his body, waging war against the law of his mind and making him a prisoner of the law of sin 
Romans
 7:22 and 23.

Although he has received the knowledge of right willing, he does not find in himself the strength to do what he desires; until, for the good will he has taken up, he deserves to find the power of virtues he seeks.