Chapter Ten

The passage from the Apostle in 
Romans

2:14
, about the Gentiles who do by nature the things of the law, is explained and defended.

There is a certain wisdom in unbelievers from the remnants of nature created by God, but no movement of goodwill exists without the Holy Spirit.

CHAPTER 22.

But
 lest it might seem that this calamity of the first man has passed on to his progeny, which has the whole judgment of all human nature intact, this teacher is about to prove by the example of the Gentiles and thus says (Collation 13, chapter 12):

Finally, the fact that the human race did not lose the knowledge of good after the transgression of Adam is very clearly declared by the Apostle's statement, who says in 
Romans

2:14
, 

"When the Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature the things required by the law, these not having the law are a law to themselves, who show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness and their thoughts alternately accusing or even defending them, on the day when God will judge the secrets of men."

If the Apostle speaks of those who are called from the foreskin and, when they were far off, were made near (Ephesians 
2:13
), believing in him who once did not have mercy, now has mercy (First Peter 
2:10
), and justifying the circumcision by faith, and the foreskin through faith (Romans 
3:30
), made two into one in himself, breaking down the wall of enmity (Ephesians 
2:14
) of Jews and Gentiles, in one new man making peace; concluding all in unbelief, so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe (Galatians 
3:22
):

If, I say, the Apostle speaks of those in whose hearts God writes the new covenant with his finger, that is, the Holy Spirit, so that they naturally perform the fullness of the law and acts of charity, with their nature reformed and renewed; 

what does the novelty of this most arrogant opinion help, since the reconciliation of enemies can only be attributed to the grace of the Mediator? For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his grace (Romans 
3:23
).

Therefore, grace is the glory of God, not the merit of the liberated. For who has first given to him, that it should be repaid to him? Nothing of good work comes from the dead, nothing of justice proceeds from the wicked: all their salvation is by grace; and therefore, it is the glory of God, so that whoever glories, may glory in him whose glory he needed (Romans 
11:35
).

But if, which this disputant prefers to be understood, these things are said of those who, alien from Christian grace, established certain things similar to the commandments of the law by their own judgment, understanding that the morals of cities and the concord of peoples could not otherwise be maintained, unless both rewards for right actions and penalties for sins were decreed:

This authority from the book of Ecclesiasticus is omitted by some editions but is found in the manuscripts. In other editions, it reads, from wisdom itself from God. In one manuscript, it reads, held primacy among all nations: and in another, these final words are missing.

I went to Jacob, and I found it. Therefore, as it is said by the Wisdom of God itself, 

"I came forth from the mouth of the Most High, and I held the first place among all peoples; I sought rest in Jacob, and I found it."

So who would doubt that this wisdom is preserved in human nature for the benefit of temporal life, as it was created by God? 
    For if the rational mind's ability did not extend even to ordering earthly matters, nature would not be corrupted but extinct.

Even though it excels in the most excellent arts and all disciplines of human learning 

Sirach
 24:7, it cannot justify itself: because it uses its good things wrongly, and without the worship of the true God, it is condemned for impiety and uncleanness, and what it thinks defends it, actually accuses it.

Therefore, since Paul states that no flesh is justified by the works of the law 

Romans
 3:20; and that in Christ, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything, but a new creation 

Galatians
 5:6; why does he instruct the impious liberty of unbelievers with natural goods and want to justify it by their own principles?

Why does he define the nakedness of the transgressor's knowledge as suitable for the renewal of the damaged old way? 
    As if this knowledge, whether obtained from the remaining works of nature or sought from the teaching of the law, could by its own understanding ensure that we love to do what we know should be done: or that there is any movement of good will, except that which is created by the breath of charity diffused through the Holy Spirit.

For without faith it is impossible to please 

Hebrews
 11:6: and, 

"Whatever is not of faith is sin"

Romans
 14:23: and, in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything; but faith working through love 

Galatians
 5:6.