Chapter Fifteen

How much power Cassian attributes to free will.

Job, in his struggle with the devil, is thought to have won by his own strength.

It is proven that Job won with God's help.

The strength of endurance comes only from God's grace.

Cassian's error: Job had the strength to resist from free will, not from grace.

But so far, so that you do not seem to entirely deviate from the set rule, you transferred the principles of virtues and merits from free will to grace, admitting that the voluntary movements of good desires cannot be advanced or completed without God's help.

But now, distancing God further and separating Him from the sustenance of man, you attribute such power to free will that it not only endures the loss of many possessions and the bitter end of the entire family and relationships with equanimity, but also overcomes the unspeakable torments of its own body by the resolve of naked will.

And to leave no doubt in your argument, you set up the example of holy Job, who, you assert, contended against that notable cruelty of diabolical savagery without God's protection.

You try to prove it with the argument that the most bloodthirsty enemy confessed himself to have been overcome not by the Lord's virtue but by Job's, because he did not say that God's grace hindered him in the severer conflict, as if that man ought to be surrounded by divine protection in losses and bereavements but not need help in the torments of his flesh and soul.

If, therefore, this greatness of spirit, which overcomes the punishment of so many deaths inflicted on each and every limb, is considered the most memorable and illustrious among the palms of the saints, and you assert it to subsist from human virtue alone, what praise and merit will remain that the liberty of free will cannot attain in the pursuits of peace and quiet, which you have crowned with its own strength at the end of such a great struggle?

I therefore ask you, do you think that this man, when he was tested by the torments we read about, had the Holy Spirit in him?

If you say he had it, it is certain that God, whom he did not abandon, helped him.

But if you say the Holy Spirit departed from him, his prophetic word convicts you, saying, "For I know that my Redeemer lives, and at the last day I will rise from the earth, and I will be clothed again with my skin, and in my flesh I will see God, whom I will see for myself, and my eyes will behold, and not another: my hope is laid up in my bosom" (
Job
 19:25).

If this is rightly understood as a prophecy about the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, his resurrection as the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep, and the hope of redemption laid up in him for all the saints, it clearly appears that the grace of God did not depart from his temple and that the Lord already did in this his holy one what he promised to do later in his apostles and martyrs, saying, "But when they deliver you up, do not worry about how or what you should speak.

For it will be given to you in that hour what you should speak; for it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you" (
Matthew
 10:19).

What then when the same holy man...

Would he not have answered, did he not trust in God's help, saying, "He who is mocked by his friend as I am will call upon the Lord, and He will answer him" 
 (Job twelve four)? Or did he not know that he possessed what he had from Him, about whom he said, "With Him is wisdom and strength; He has counsel and understanding" 
 (Job thirteen three)? And about whom he says, "In His hand is the life of every living thing and the breath of all mankind" 
 (Job twelve ten)? And again, "I wait for my change to come; You will call, and I will answer You; You will stretch out Your hand to the work of Your hands. You indeed have counted my steps, but You spare my sins; You have sealed up my transgressions in a bag, but You have healed my iniquity." 
 Therefore, the Lord had not abandoned the one whom He was healing, nor had He withdrawn His help from the one to whom He was applying purifying remedies to make him shine more clearly.

To this endurance of sufferings, in which this saint shone, that man was also prepared by the Lord, who said, "Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for You are with me" 
 (Psalm twenty-three four): and that, "The salvation of the righteous is from the Lord, and He is their protector in time of trouble" 
 (Psalm thirty-seven thirty-nine). To this endurance, that man was also prepared by the Lord, who attributed both believing in Christ and suffering for Christ to Christ, saying: "Therefore, having been justified by faith, let us have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; through whom also we have access by faith into this grace in which we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of the children of God: and not only that, but we also glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces patience, and patience, character, and character, hope. Now hope does not disappoint, because the love of God has been poured out in our hearts by the Holy Spirit who was given to us" 
 (Romans five one). And again, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, 'For Your sake we are killed all day long; we are counted as sheep for the slaughter' 
 (Psalm forty-four twenty-two): but in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him who loved us" 
 (Romans eight thirty-three). The strength of this endurance, whence it descended, blessed Peter, and in him the whole Church, learned from the voice of Truth itself, saying, "Indeed, Satan has asked to sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for you, Peter, that your faith should not fail" 
 (Luke twenty-two thirty-one). Therefore, whoever does not fail in tribulations should not doubt that he is helped by Him to whom the hearts of all the faithful cry out daily, "Do not lead us into temptation, but deliver us from evil" 
 (Matthew six thirteen): for "The Lord protects the souls of His saints; He will deliver them from the hand of the wicked" 
 (Psalm ninety-seven ten).

But as you say: The grace of God did not entirely depart from Job, because God allowed his tempter so much.