Chapter Five

The Fifth Definition of Cassian: Opposing views should be accepted at the same time; both that good will is born from grace, and that grace depends on good will.

Cassian's opinion attributes error to Catholics as well as Pelagians.

It is refuted by the definitions of the supreme pontiffs and councils.

1.

After this, you present many testimonies to show that free will is sometimes strong and sometimes weak:

as if there were some who could fulfill what others cannot do without God's help;

or that a person receives a command for no other reason than to seek divine assistance.

You conclude and say: And so these things are somewhat mixed up and confused, so that it is a great question among many as to which depends on which:

whether God has mercy on us because we have begun to show good will, or whether we attain the beginning of good will because God has mercy on us.

Many believe each of these things and assert them more strongly, being involved in various and opposing errors.

Here, it seems to you, what was mixed up is now clear; and what could not be explained is now resolved.

You define that there are two opposing errors, in which those who do not know what to hold between free will and grace are entangled.

And in one, you place those who say that God has mercy on us because we have shown the beginnings of good will; undoubtedly referring to the followers of Pelagian doctrine, who say that God's grace is given according to our merits:

and in the other, those who say that the beginnings of good will come from the mercy of God; meaning those who have defeated the enemies of grace.

So if it is an error to attribute the beginnings of good will to a person not divinely assisted, and it is an error to confess that the will is prepared by the Lord, where are we to be directed, so that we may avoid both?

2.

If we follow both, you say, we will acquiesce to no error.

You subject us to two errors, and as you understand it, double the wrongness:

by dividing you condemn, by mixing you justify.

By this law, by this rule, you could declare that those who say it is always necessary to lie are as wrong as those who define it is never necessary to lie (noting Cassian's 17th Conference, in which he teaches that it is sometimes permissible to lie);

but so that there is no sin in either, both should be followed:

because neither should falsehood always be avoided, nor truth always neglected.

Your opinion is entirely mistaken.

From two evils, one good cannot be made:

two vices do not produce one virtue:

two falsehoods do not make one truth.

What are equal in merit are not diminished by joining, but increase.

Therefore, those who assert that the beginnings of good will are generated by God's inspiration should not be condemned by that opinion, which argues...

Those who think that free will alone is sufficient without the help of grace are mistaken. One of these definitions was rejected by the Church, while the other was defended. Neither of them fits the covenant of this new testament in any way, being more corrupt than Catholicism and less corrected than Pelagianism.

Many, you say, believe each of these things and assert even more, entangled in various and contradictory errors.

So you prefer to condemn the victors with the heretics and to mark those with error who have driven out the error from the Church?

According to your judgment, which claims that the holy and faithful will is not from God in all men (as if you attribute much to grace by acknowledging that it works in the minds of some), Pope Innocent and the worthiest successor of Peter erred when he spoke of those who boast in free will:

"For what," he said, "should we think of their minds henceforth, who think they owe it to themselves that they are good?"

And again, when he wrote about the fall of the first man:

"For free will," he said, "once suffered, while using its goods too recklessly, fell into the depths of transgression and found no way to rise from there; deceived by its own freedom eternally, it would have lain oppressed by this ruin, unless the advent of Christ for his grace had lifted him."

The Eastern Bishops erred, in whose judgment Pelagius was compelled to anathematize those who say that God's grace is given according to our merits, so that he could be seen as Catholic (See the book of Pelagius' Acts chapters 14, 33-35). The African Bishops' Councils erred, which by their decrees established that both knowing what we ought to do and loving to do it are gifts of God: so that with charity building up, knowledge might not inflate, because as it is written of God, "He is the one who teaches man knowledge" (Psalms 94:10); and it is written (First John 4:7): "Charity is from God" (Carthage council, canons 4 and 5; see appendix p. 272). The two hundred and fourteen priests erred, who in the letter they prefaced to their constitutions, addressed the blessed Zosimus, bishop of the apostolic see: "We have established that the sentence against Pelagius and Celestius, pronounced through the venerable bishop Innocent from the see of the most blessed apostle Peter, should remain until the clearest confession is made."

They are kept by the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, not only to know, but also to do justice, helping us in every act; so that without it, we can have, think, say, or do nothing of true and holy piety.

The holy seat of blessed Peter erred, which speaks to the entire world through the mouth of Pope Zosimus: "However, by the instinct of God (for all good things should be referred to their author, from whom they originate), we have referred everything to the conscience of our brothers and fellow bishops."

The African bishops erred, writing back to the same Pope Zosimus, praising him for the healthiness of his judgment when they say: "However, what you stated in the letters that you took care to be sent to all the provinces, saying, 'By the instinct of God (for all good things should be referred to their author, from whom they originate), we have referred everything to the conscience of our brothers and fellow bishops,' we understood it to mean that you, in passing, cut off with the strict sword of truth those who exalt the freedom of human will against the help of God. For what did you do with such free will, if not refer everything to the conscience of our humility? And yet you wisely and faithfully saw and truthfully and confidently said that it was done by the instinct of God. Surely, because the will is prepared by the Lord, and that people may do good, He Himself touches the hearts of His children with paternal inspirations (Proverbs 8, according to the Septuagint). For all who are led by the Spirit of God, they are the children of God (Romans 8:14). So we do not feel that our will is lacking, and in all good motions of the human will, we do not doubt that His help prevails more."

Do you see your rules shattered by the strength of invincible constitutions, and in the structure of faith, the crooked and cracked joints, like the walls of Jericho, falling at the sound of priestly trumpets (Joshua 6:20)?