
by Othloh of St Emmeram
Patrologia Latina Volume 


The beginning of the book concerning the temptation of a certain monk.


Part One.

There was a certain clerk given over to many kinds of vices. When he had been frequently admonished by the Lord for his correction, he finally converted and came to the monastic profession, without any of his friends knowing about it.
In that place where he became a monk, though he found many men of different types—some reading pagan books, others reading sacred Scripture—he began to imitate only those whom he saw devoted to divine reading.
But the more frequently he engaged in such reading, the more he felt the troubles of diabolic temptation growing within him. Yet trusting in the Lord and continually committing himself to God's grace, he strove to persevere in sacred reading with the same spirit with which he had begun.
When after much time he was freed from this assault, considering how both he and others might be edified by what he had suffered, he wrote down not only the troubles of temptation that had been brought upon him, but also the words of sacred Scripture that had come to him through divine inspiration, which he had meanwhile used as a shield in responding to diabolic deception.
Thus indeed he begins to write about the trouble of his temptations:

I endured various delusions of Satan both waking and sleeping.

Though I cannot bring forth all of them, I wish to relate some that are fixed in my memory, as best I can.
And I believe this should be testified first concerning these deceptions: both before my profession of monastic life and long afterward, I suffered the temptation that there existed a rather foolish and imprudent will even in my conversion itself.
The tempter suggested that, against the Scripture which says, 'Do all things with counsel,' I wished to undertake this suddenly without the counsel of parents and friends, and while placed in the greatest fervor of youth. He argued it would be most ill-advised for someone like me to undertake such a dangerous vow.
Therefore it would be much better if I waited until the perfection of a more mature age, and then finally, when every virtue had established itself, I should freely undertake the desired conversion.
These things and similar ones were brought upon me at first by diabolic delusion, as if sympathizing with me and giving me counsel.
But then, when the most wicked tempter could not achieve the full effect of his will in me—God's grace resisting—he was stirred up to a battle of greater wickedness.
For by his usual art he strove to drag me toward desperation, suggesting that it was in vain for someone like me to want to turn back, since I was entangled in so many crimes that I was hateful not only to rulers but also to all the common people, and even to my own parents and relatives.
He said, 'Do you think that such a wicked man can merit pardon from God, the most strict judge? Especially since, as it is written, the righteous person is scarcely saved.'
'Therefore do not desire things that should not be desired, but rather turn the effort of your labor toward those things that you can obtain from now on.'
'For if, as you most earnestly suppose, such an ability were granted to all—that a perverted man could reach the kingdoms of heaven just as much as a righteous one—that most excellent Apostle Paul would certainly not say, For not all have faith.'
'And again the same apostle says, Not all obey the Gospel. And the Savior himself, the most truthful author, gave this fundamental teaching to his own and to the whole world: Let him who can receive it, receive it.'
'In which saying it is made clear beyond doubt that not everyone can achieve good things.'
When I was tormented by such delusions, what do you think my state of mind was then? Certainly I could do nothing else but weep, and according to the Psalmist, my tears were my bread day and night.
I confess indeed from my inmost heart that no one can overcome such things except through the grace of the Lord alone.
But after the most cunning plotter could not drag me to consent to the desperation he had inflicted, he tried through other arguments of his deceit to turn me aside to blasphemy against divine justice—not by deterring and reproaching me, but as if grieving over and sympathizing with my affliction.
He suggested such thoughts to my heart: 'O what a pitiable young man, whose sorrow no human being deigns to attend to! What human being could even conceive that you are weighed down by such great affliction?'
'Therefore you should not blame them, because they cannot help with what they cannot know. For the Lord alone knows all things. And therefore to him alone must be attributed whatever seems inept and disordered.'
'Since he both knows and can do all things, why does he not help you in your tribulation—you who for love of him left the world long ago and have now endured inestimable torment for a long time?'
'What kind of reason, I ask, is this severity that torments in every way those who continually cry out to him?'
'Do what you are going to do. Put aside useless prayers and lamentations, because he perseveres now in the same severity in which he has been until now.'
'For it is extremely foolish to attempt through prayers those things which you know you cannot obtain.'
'Nevertheless, do not fear, because the injustice of one powerful being never allows all to perish.'
'For how could it happen that any human being would deserve to be afflicted always? Or what mortal can be without sin from the beginning to the end of life?'
'Or how can the innocence of a little child be acquired in old age? As Christ teaches, saying, Unless you are converted and become like little children, you will not enter the kingdom of heaven.'
'Does not this also move you, what the prophet Ezekiel threatens, saying, The soul that sins, it shall die?'
'For if everyone who sins will die, then certainly no human being will be saved, because no one can be found without sin.'
'Does your mind not also attend to that remarkable saying which the same prophet speaks a little later? He says, If a righteous person turns away from his righteousness and commits iniquity, all his righteous deeds will be given over to oblivion.'
'This is why that Judas, the betrayer of the Lord, when he had committed this one crime of betrayal, was condemned after his many works of righteousness.'
'Consider still two other major examples of this reasoning, in which all our position can be proved and established.'
'For it is read in the book of Exodus that the Lord said to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will be merciful to whom it pleases me.'
'And again it is written in the Gospel that when someone wanted to become his disciple and said, I will follow you wherever you go, he was rejected by the same Lord, who said, Foxes have dens and birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.'
'O indiscriminate severity! O pitiable justice! That follows only the judgment of its own will and disdains to receive those who flee to it.'
'Such discipline is certainly intolerable and will deservedly please no one.'
Such delusions disturbed my thoughts for a long time, in which it can be sufficiently proved how many dangers my mind was subject to.
What I wish to relate next seems to belong to these same delusions.
For it often happened that because I wished to rise at the first signal in the morning hours, as the holy rule teaches, I was awakened by some phantom signal long before the time of rising, and came hastily to the oratory.
I believed for a long time that this was a divine work, until I felt myself forced from timely sleep to untimely waking.
I also suffered this for several years during the night hours: although I lay quite healthy asleep in bed, when I should rise for morning praise, I was as if bound by some fetter of weakness in all my limbs, and thus came to church with unsteady and most difficult steps.

One more temptation and delusion must be brought forth.

This I can describe all the more difficultly because I had never read or heard anything of this kind from anyone.
For after I was assailed by the above-mentioned temptations and many others—some of which I have no memory of, and some of which I do not wish to bring forth here lest I become tedious to readers—yet by God's grace I was never torn away from faith and hope of heavenly help.
Then I felt myself tormented for a long time by such an assault through which I was compelled to doubt completely both the knowledge of sacred Scripture and the very essence of God himself.
In the crisis of other temptations, some interval of relief was provided, some refuge of hope was offered. But in these, for continuous hours, I was deprived of almost all knowledge of consolation.
In other temptations, strengthened somewhat by the teachings of sacred Scripture, I fought with the weapons of faith and hope against the darts of death that were hurled at me. But in this one, surrounded by complete doubt and blindness of mind, I doubted utterly whether there was any truth and benefit in the sacred Scriptures, or whether almighty God even exists.
In the others, I say, the cause of the assault was in some way tolerable and tempered. But in this one such violence broke forth that not only my spiritual senses but even my bodily senses were deprived of their usual vigor.
For it seemed to me at times as if, with sight and hearing veiled, I could see or hear nothing according to my usual powers.
Meanwhile I seemed to hear someone conversing with me, even placing his mouth close and whispering words into my ears, saying:
'Why do you exhaust yourself so long with empty labor? Where is that hope of yours which you held until now in Scripture?'
'You, most foolish of all mortals, cannot you prove by your own experiences that both the testimony of the Scriptures and the conception of all creation exist without reason and without a ruler?'
'Do you not know by experience that the account of divine books is one thing, and the life and customs of human beings are proved to be something else?'
'Do you think so many thousands of human beings are in error, who, as you yourself have observed until now, care neither to observe nor to receive the teachings of books?'
When I often pondered these things with sadness in my heart, as if questioning and objecting—saying, 'If this is so, why is there such great agreement in almost all divinely inspired Scriptures, that they speak with equal reason about God the creator and about the observance of his commandments?'
Words of this kind seemed to be inspired in me again, as if in response:
'Precisely for this reason, O foolish one, the Scripture in which you trust speaks words about the person of God and about manifold religion, because those men who were once the authors of that same Scripture lived then in the same way as people also live in the present time.'
'But the manner of living in the present time, as you also know, is such that people speak honorably and quite religiously, yet their actions are far otherwise, namely as expediency and human frailty permit.'
'Can you not prove daily that these things are so? Wherefore you should think that the authors of ancient scriptures composed religious and honorable sayings indeed, but did not live according to the quality of those same sayings.'
'Therefore understand all the books of divine law to be written according to such a manner, that they have some surface of religiosity and virtue externally, but internally they seek another reason and understanding.'
'Just as in very many places, especially in divine books, sayings are easily found that retain one meaning in the letter and another in the understanding.'
'I prove that all these things are so by one testimony of Paul. For he says, The letter kills, but the spirit—that is, the meaning—gives life.'
'Are you not taught clearly enough through these words of the Apostle that if you follow the sayings of books, you will suffer the greatest dangers?'
'The same must also be understood about the essence of God. Otherwise, if there were any person or power of almighty God, such great confusion and diversity would not appear in all things.'
'Nor would such great crises befall you, and such doubt as you now suffer would not threaten you at all.'
When I was assailed by such delusions—more than one would believe possible—and because of the unheard-of nature of the assault itself I feared to reveal it openly to any of the brothers, for I thought no one could believe or bear to hear such things.

Then prostrate on the ground, drawing long sighs from bitterness and gathering the strength of my spirit, I sent forth such a voice from lips and heart.

'O if you are someone, Almighty One, and if you are present everywhere, as I have read very often in many books, now I beg you, show who you are and what you can do, rescuing me quickly from these imminent dangers. For I can no longer bear such great crises.'
There was no delay thereafter. By God's grace not only was all that fog of the aforementioned doubt taken away, but also such a great light of knowledge shone forth in my heart that never afterward did I endure such darkness of deadly doubt, and I began to understand things I had known less before.
The grace of this understanding was so increased for me during that same time that I could not easily conceal it.
For kindled by some ineffable impulse and unusual fervor, I was stirred to undertake some work of divine praise for the grace bestowed.
Since I could neither remain completely silent about this same grace of understanding, nor bear witness to it in a fitting manner, I began to consider whether perhaps the fervor within me might be allowed to come forth through dictation and writing.
Taking the occasion for writing in this way, I wrote both what I brought forth above about diabolic delusion and what I still wish to bring forth, from the discourse of divine inspiration, beginning thus:

Since therefore I have brought forth to some extent the diabolic delusions that arose because of my sins and were stirred up against me.

It seems indeed consequent and reasonable that I should also reveal in writing the modes of divine inspiration by which my mind was instructed for resistance.
This I do lest anyone, recognizing these delusions as written here alone and not immediately recognizing from equal reading the instruments of heavenly help, should think that I have attributed to myself the victory achieved, which is never mine.
Or lest anyone should fear that the same thing will come to him in his own temptations, as if divine protection had been lacking to me in mine.
Giving no place to this suspicion, I confess that although I was instructed in every way by divine grace against the snares of the devil, I never fought with any due struggle of vigils or fasting or any continence according to the powers given—languishing as I was in sloth and laxity of spirit.
For to pass over the gifts of liberal knowledge that had been bestowed, which are the greatest instruments of discernment, I remember that frequently, and especially when I first rose from my bed in the morning hours,
I was immediately, in an ineffable manner, sometimes rebuked, sometimes gently admonished, and often beseeched with the most humble effort for the correction of my morals and vices by someone as if rising with me and walking with me at the same time.
This concerned first those things which perhaps the day before I had ignorantly committed and considered as nothing; then for the correction of those things which I had committed at any time, either by foolish laughing or by careless speaking, or even by thinking useless things.
Finally, for the correction of any vice which I had committed long before and scarcely remembered.
When, surrounded by such inspiration and impulse, I had entered the church and had humbly bowed or prostrated myself for the practice of prayer,
God knows I do not lie—it seemed to me that something was asking of me with that same earnestness of prayer, saying:
'Just as it is pleasing to you to obtain from me the things you ask, so also it is precious to me if you obey my prayers.'
Adam had the strength of free will to cling to me, and in me he could possess everything. Then, after his fall, he had to return to me with the great sweat of penance. The powers of will and understanding that he had before his transgression—which he held without any sluggishness of sense for all the rights of goodness—afterward, with the frailty of flesh hindering him, he could only maintain through heavy labor.
When you understand through this reasoning that not only the first man—crowned with the unique primacy of human nature and with wisdom—but also all the heavenly beings, whose excellence no creature can match, cannot firmly cling to me without proper testing, nor can they clearly see the difference between themselves and me: which of the remaining humans, who fall short of the inborn prudence of the first man, do you think is so perfect that without temptation he could gain certain experience of my magnificence and his own fragility?
But if you complain that unusual troubles of temptation have rushed upon you, consider also that you have received my grace up to this point in an almost unusual measure, more than many others.
Doesn't it seem unusual to you that from boyhood to the present, though you were entangled in crimes of every kind, you not only escaped fitting punishments, but also—almost in reverse—received with the easiest effort those great gifts of my mercy that have been denied to many religious persons, even those seeking them with great labor (which can only be considered with great wonder)?
Remember, I ask you, what benefits you gained without the usual labor, and what troubles many others of my chosen ones endured before they obtained any peace and rest—I'm not even speaking of the future life, but of the present one—even though some bore various afflictions amid the benefits given to them.
And so that these things may become clearer to your mind, I want to name certain individuals who led such a life, both in the Old and New Testaments.
Do you know how many labors and tribulations the patriarch Jacob endured before he could earn any grace from the blessing received from his father Isaac?
For as the book of Genesis testifies, Esau always hated Jacob because of the blessing their father had given him. And so, at his mother's urging, Jacob went into exile out of fear of his brother, where he served his uncle for fourteen years, receiving the work of a lowly person.
Later, when he returned to his homeland, he still so feared his brother's anger that, sending messengers ahead for reconciliation, he addressed him not only as brother but as lord, saying: 'Speak thus to my lord Esau: Your brother says this: I now send this embassy to my lord, that I may find favor in your sight.'
And when he saw his brother coming from afar, falling to the ground in fear, he bowed seven times until his brother approached.
Do you see, then, how many afflictions that great man endured before he tasted any joys of the promised blessing? And even when he did taste them, great fear overshadowed those joys.
The same can be said about his son Joseph. When his brothers learned of his dreams and judged that he would become someone great and be set over them, immediately forgetting all brotherhood, they were inflamed with envy against him in every way. So much so that, barely restraining themselves from killing him, they sold him to the Ishmaelites.
Transferred by them to Egypt, he endured such great crushing and oppression there that, as the Psalmist recalls about him, iron pierced his soul until his word came—that is, until he received the predestined and revealed power that he would possess not only over all Egypt, but also over all his brothers when they fled to him because of famine.
You can find similar examples in the outstanding man Moses, in my servant David, and in holy Daniel. All of them, though in different ways, endured very great tribulations and dangers both before and after they received their dignity.
Many such men are found in the Old Testament, but far more in the New Testament, who suffered all the greater dangers precisely because they no longer desired any present rewards, but only future and eternal ones.
Those who lived religiously before the law or under the law, though they were just and holy, endured tribulations inflicted more by others than by themselves.
But those for whom the true Sun of justice arose—that is, Christ, who said: 'If anyone wishes to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me,' and again: 'Whoever loves his life will lose it'—
urged on by such teachings, they offered themselves to torturers. And if no other torturer was available, they always crucified themselves along with their vices and desires.
And so they did not easily obtain earthly dignity, but continually strove for spiritual dignity—so that they might strongly fortify themselves against diabolical temptations and instruct others by their examples.
Nevertheless, before they enjoyed victory and peace over their own passions, or were set over others to govern them, they endured very many dangers and passed through long periods of time.
Some, even when already established in spiritual dignity, besides voluntary afflictions, also suffered scourges of sickness or various persecutions sent by me for the safeguarding of humility, right up to the end of this present life.
Although you can find innumerable such men in the New Testament, as mentioned above, I want to name a few for the sake of example, so that when I have presented these as witnesses, you may more easily recognize the character of the others.
First, then, consider the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ—what they labored for, what they endured before they possessed any fruit of their labor, before they reached the degree of sublimity to be received—I'm not speaking of the future life, but only in the present life, where they were to be set over the universal Church.
For as the words of the Gospel testify, Simon Peter himself, the first of the apostles, said to Jesus: 'Behold, we have left everything and followed you. What then will there be for us?'
What do you think should be understood in these words, where blessed Peter says that he and his fellow apostles have left everything, if not—which is of the greatest difficulty—parents, relatives, the sweet bonds of marriage, children, estates, homes, and finally their own will and all desires of the flesh?
For this reason, although the apostles, having left all their possessions, constantly accompanied the Lord Jesus with faithful minds, it is nevertheless clear that they were tempted and wearied by the devil for a long time because of the abandonment of their possessions and because of the occasions of human frailty—especially since the Lord himself willed to suffer his temptations.
Hence he says to these same apostles: 'You are those who have remained with me in my temptations.'
Moreover, they were pressed by the greatest tribulation when they saw the Lord himself, in whom they placed all their hope, seized by the most wicked men, scourged, and condemned to a most shameful death.
Another tribulation followed this one, because on account of the unprecedented and hateful passion of so great a Teacher—though revealed by many proofs—they scarcely believed in his resurrection.
Amid these things they were also afflicted by persecution and fear of the Jews.
Therefore, the apostles were afflicted and tested by so many tribulations before they were placed in that foundation of the whole Church where they were to be set, before they merited to obtain any fruit of their labor or power in winning souls.
But having spoken generally about all the apostles, now I wish to make special mention, for the sake of example, of some of them and of the other Fathers—what tribulation and distress each of them endured before or after receiving the sublimity of spiritual grace.
So that when you recognize that such outstanding Fathers were afflicted with innumerable tribulations, you may prove that what has been given to you up to now is unusual grace rather than the trouble of any temptation.
Consider therefore holy Paul and think about how many kinds of persecutions he endured.
For as can be known from the book of Acts of the Apostles and from his own letters, after he came to conversion at Christ Jesus' calling, he was almost never without the dangers of opponents and persecutors.
Take also as his colleague—at least in the multitude of persecutions—Athanasius, bishop of the Church of Alexandria. As is read in the Ecclesiastical History, immediately after receiving the dignity of bishop, laboring for the defense of the Catholic faith, he was afflicted by the immense plots of persecuting heretics almost until the end of his life.
For sacred Scripture reports of him: 'So great were his struggles in the Church for the integrity of the faith that it seems that what is written was said about him: For I will show him how much he must suffer for my name.'
For the whole world conspired in his persecution, and the princes of the earth were stirred up, peoples, kingdoms, and armies came together against him.
But he applied to himself that divine saying: 'Though armies encamp against me, my heart will not fear; though war arise against me, in this I will hope.'
Let these two men suffice for you as examples of human persecution, so that you may judge not only that you have never endured anything unusual or unheard of from any person, but also that you know you have not suffered even the smallest fraction of the persecutions that others endured.
For you—because you endured a little adversity and persecution earlier when you were in the world, and now placed in the monastery you are wearied by the smallest stings of temptations, by which every Christian must be tested—you frequently think yourself afflicted by greater dangers of persecutions and temptations than others.
But you will find these things to be far different from how they seem to you, if you consider the truth.
For the fact that in persecutions inflicted by human violence you have endured nothing similar to many others has already been sufficiently demonstrated by examples.
Next, however, you must consider how much you fall short of others who voluntarily labor in affliction of the flesh and in all contempt of this life.
Consider therefore two venerable Fathers and teachers of the spiritual life—namely, holy Antony and blessed Benedict—whom you can more easily recall because they are better known to you from constant reading.
Reading their lives, you can quickly learn how much affliction each endured for the love of God, how devoutly they abandoned all worldly things—especially when they were still of youthful age—and then how many plots and temptations of the devil they sustained.
For one of them, that is, blessed Antony—from whom arose almost all the institution of hermits and cenobites—began to excel in such great holiness of life that the ancient enemy, inflamed in every way by the torches of envy, not only attacked him with spiritual and invisible plots but even afflicted him with bodily and visible blows.
But the other, filled no less with God's grace, left the greatest monuments of his holiness both in writings and in conduct.
What more can I say? Whatever affliction, whatever labor there is in vigils and fasts, or in the horror of solitude, in the rejection of costly clothing, or in overcoming the passion of carnal desires, or in conquering all kinds of diabolic envy's tricks—you will find that they endured these things for a long time before they reached the height of perfection by which they were to be preferred to many.
Therefore, I ask you, carefully consider these things and compare the great afflictions of the aforementioned Fathers to your tribulations, which you sometimes judge to be unusual. Then without doubt you will know that the sorrows you now endure or have ever endured are small, even though those same Fathers in no way deserved, as you do, to be afflicted for penance for capital crimes.
Moreover, in your early age you had much greater helps of human consolation than they did, and many more consolations of the outer man were bestowed on you by me than on them. Justly urged by these, you should have hastened with great faith and devotion to obtain the purity of the inner man, which is acquired only through great affliction of the flesh.
For if they, helped by small benefits, were so inflamed that they sustained the greatest labors to attain the purity of spiritual life, why does it seem burdensome to you—who though still small have obtained great gifts—to endure at least some tribulation for that same purity?
Tell me, I ask, who do you think you are, that you are unwilling to bear any trouble either for present helps or for future and everlasting reward?
What then? Formerly, when you were placed in school, how you labored for great capacity in learning! Then what zeal did you have when placed in secular life to escape its vain and harmful luxury?
And what even now, when you came to the monastery—by fasting, keeping vigil, praying, or by persevering in whatever regular discipline—do you labor more than others so that you may obtain pardon for past crimes and have caution regarding future ones?
After all, whoever wishes to amend the past properly and avoid future evils must necessarily strive to subdue the flesh in vigils, fasts, and prayers, as well as in other good works.
But nevertheless, insofar as the newness of your conversion and the smallness of your labor permit, I do not deny that you have constant care for attaining all these things.
Therefore I will not take away from you henceforth the same benefits of my mercy that I have shown you up to now. Only act manfully, and let your heart be strengthened, and wait for the Lord.
There still remains one affliction and temptation—that is, the long-lasting passion of carnal concupiscence, in which you believe yourself to be especially tormented. And so in this matter, as in the others, the examples of certain Fathers must be presented.
But this must be considered first: that he who has never experienced the corruption of the flesh and he who has experienced it often cannot be equaled in any struggle.
For although both are afflicted by grave assault, he who has often succumbed to this kind of vice, conquered by human frailty, will sustain much longer and more severe battles of the cardinal passions, the more frequently he subjected himself by consenting to those same passions.
Having considered this matter, then, take as examples some men of both kinds approved from sacred Scripture, so that having observed the temptation and labor of others, you may more easily recognize the extent of your own assault and labor.
And let those be proposed first who struggled for the perseverance of inner chastity, and then those who struggled to do penance for a life of corruption and luxury.
As the book of Dialogues narrates, holy Equitius, when in the time of his youth he was wearied by excessive struggle with carnal desires, was made more diligent in the practice of prayer by the very distresses of his temptation.
And when he sought a remedy for this matter from almighty God with continuous prayers, one night, with an angel present, he saw himself made a eunuch.
See how much this saint labored—the more he was assailed, the more zealously he prayed not to be overcome.
Also, in the Conferences of the Fathers, it is read concerning a certain outstanding abbot who was called Serenus that, when he persisted untiringly in nightly and daily prayers, fasts, and vigils for the internal chastity of body and soul,
an angel of the Lord came to him in a vision at night and, as if opening his belly, tearing out and casting away a certain fiery swelling of the flesh from his internal organs, and restoring all the intestines to their places as they had been, said: 'Behold, the incentives of your flesh are cut away, and know that you have obtained today the perpetual purity of body that you faithfully sought.'
See, you observe how many labors this man also suffered. Therefore, so that no one may have excuse or diffidence that he cannot obtain what he faithfully seeks, each of these merited to attain what he steadfastly sought.
And so that you may have such examples not only in the stronger sex but also in the weaker, in the Lives of the Fathers it is narrated that a certain holy abbess named Sarah was strongly assailed by the demon of fornication for thirteen years, and never asked that such a struggle depart from her, but said only this: 'Give me strength, O God.'
Behold what faith and how great a love of piety! Behold what each sex has labored for the virtue of chastity.
Just as you are far from the constancy of purity of all these, so also you have never experienced their labor and assault.
For which reason, since you differ in every way in merits and labor from the perfect and those persevering in chastity, let us see whether you are in any way similar to the tribulation and assault that those endured in doing penance—those whose impudicity and irreligiosity you seem to differ from less.
For it is read in the aforementioned Lives of the Fathers that there was a man leading a most shameful life beyond all his neighbors, so that he was held most notorious in wickedness.
This man, at some point moved to compunction by God's mercy, turned to penance, and shutting himself within a certain tomb, washed away the pollutions of his former crimes with fountains of tears.
And when a week had passed with him thus situated, at night demons came to him in the tomb, crying out and saying: 'What are you doing, O most impure and wicked one? After being satiated with every filth, now you wish to flee from us as chaste and religious? Whether you will it or not, from now on you will be one of us.'
As they reproached him with these and many similar things, he lay immovable, not even turning his hearing toward them, nor responding with any word at all.
And when they repeated the same things many times and he was not moved at all, then the demons, stirred into fury, struck him with blows and, torturing him with many torments, left him half-dead.
Yet even with so many tortures, he could not be moved from the place where he had lain for the sake of prayer.
On the following night the demons came again, torturing him with more severe blows. But not even then could he be moved from the place, saying it was better to undergo death than to obey the demons of his own accord.
Nevertheless, on the third night a multitude of demons assembled, and rushing upon him without any mercy, they afflicted him with every pain and torture.
And when his body had already failed under the torments, nevertheless his last breath resisted the command of the demons.
When they saw this, crying out with a loud voice, they said: 'You have conquered, you have conquered!'
What, then, does this assault seem to you? Did you, because you often considered yourself oppressed above many by hidden and manifest tribulations, ever suffer anything like this? On the contrary, you were subject to far lesser temptations.
But although you are sufficiently overcome by this one example, yet because you judge yourself to be especially tormented in hidden and spiritual temptations, I wish to present another example in which only spiritual assault is shown.
For it is read of Mary of Egypt that among other things she told Abbot Zosimas about the character of her life and conversion, she said: 'Believe me, abba, for seventeen years I struggled with wild and irrational desires.'
And after a little: 'But how can I describe to you the thoughts that compelled me again to fornication? An unhappy fire meanwhile burned my body excessively and consumed me completely, and dragged me to the desire of intercourse.
Therefore, when such a thought inflamed me, I would prostrate myself on the ground and, flooding it with tears, I hoped that she who had commanded me in faith—that is, the most holy Mother of God—truly stood by me. And thus for seventeen years I struggled with many dangers, as I said.'
Behold, you see how much not only the male sex but also the female sex labored both for the constancy of integrity and for penance for corruption.
Have you then already labored for seventeen years fighting against thoughts of carnal desires? But why do I speak of so many years, when you have not endured such things for even one full year?
Therefore you have not yet begun the path of labor, and yet, as if from excessive labor, you have already given up exhausted.
But even if you were bearing whatever troubles of temptation and adversity, should you therefore lay down the consolations of patience and hope?
Can you not recognize from the above-mentioned examples of the holy Fathers and from other sayings of sacred Scripture that it is useful and necessary to endure temptations?
For Peter the apostle says: 'Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery trial when it comes upon you to test you, as though something strange were happening to you. But rejoice insofar as you share Christ's sufferings.'
James the apostle also teaches, saying: 'Count it all joy, my brothers, when you fall into various trials, knowing that the testing of your faith produces patience. And let patience have its perfect work, that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.'
Likewise the same apostle says: 'Blessed is the man who endures trial, for when he has been approved, he will receive the crown of life that God has promised to those who love him.'
Hence also Paul the apostle says: 'We boast in our tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces patience, and patience produces proven character, and proven character produces hope, and hope does not disappoint.'
Many such teachings are found both in the New and in the Old Testament. If you constantly attend to them, you not only more easily overcome whatever temptations come, but you also obtain the gifts of greater understanding.
For as it is written: 'A man who has been tested in many things will think many thoughts; and he who has learned much will display understanding.'
You can prove an indication of this matter in yourself, because unless you had been exercised by the varied trouble and care of temptations, you would never have studied to treat so many teachings or testimonies of Scripture. For many things previously unknown have now been opened to your investigation.
This also must especially be noted by you: that if you were to remain longer without any temptation and tribulation, you would fall more gravely and dangerously through pride in the generosity of my benefits than when you were once given over to crimes of every kind.
For the more excellent the gifts with which someone is endowed, the more he is struck by the vice of pride.
Hence that most outstanding of angels, not sustaining the gift of his dignity, fell through pride all the more gravely because he was more sublime than the others.
Saul also, as the book of Kings narrates, when before receiving the dignity of kingship he was humble and acceptable to me, afterward, becoming proud from that same dignity, was rejected by me.
David himself also, although he was outstanding among kings and pleasing to my mercy, nevertheless before he was elevated to the heights of kingship, bound himself with greater care of religion.
For earlier he returned good for evil, but later he returned evil for good. And therefore, not unmindful of his iniquity, groaning in the one hundred and second psalm, he said to me: 'Because lifting me up, you have cast me down.'
As if he were saying openly: 'The more you elevated me with sublime dignity, the more you permitted me to be entangled in greater sins.'
Moreover, how great a ruin is open to him who is elevated above others is indicated by the book of Chronicles. For it reports of Joash, king of Judah, that after the death of the priest Jehoiada, who promoted him to the kingdom, he came to such pride that, abandoning the worship of God, he allowed himself to be adored by his people.
For this crime of pride, what befell that same king, Scripture adds, saying: 'And when the year had turned, the king of Syria came up against him and came into Judah and Jerusalem, and killed all the princes of the people, and sent all the spoil to the king of Damascus. They also executed disgraceful judgments upon Joash, and departing left him in great sicknesses.'
From all these things it can be understood that no one elevated by excellence of any virtue or dignity will escape the ruin of deadly pride without great contrition.
But blessed Paul also attests to this, who, having disclosed certain virtues granted to him, adds, saying: 'And lest the greatness of the revelations should exalt me, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, an angel of Satan to buffet me.'
For if so great a man was pressed by carnal thorns for this reason—lest he be exalted because of the virtues granted to him—do you think you need to be wearied by some adversity, lest you presume to glory in the benefits you have received?
For which reason, consider, I ask you, the cause and order of your temptation, its beginning and end, so that you may recognize by what ultimately more bitter temptation you have been vexed than at first—even that temptation which you called unusual.
For in the first place you were permitted to be wearied by lighter and usual temptations, so that, as if by certain steps, you might gradually ascend to higher things and learn to contend at some point with more serious ones.
But when, making some progress in such light and moderate assault, you attributed more and more what my grace was working in you to your own strengths and merits,
I finally permitted you to fall into such a temptation that, pressed down by the magnitude of the assault, you might recognize to whom you should attribute your present failure, and to whom your past progress and all your labor's advancement:
And through this you might be all the more certain about the benefits of my grace, the less you presumed about your own merits.

Part Two.

The aforementioned cleric wrote this so that he might show to those who at the beginning of their conversion desire to read sacred Scripture how they should recognize and guard against the immense cunning of diabolical fraud—by which he usually attacks all who read that Scripture—and also how they should recognize and invoke the grace of divine inspiration.
The same cleric also wrote many other things, some indeed by dictation, others in another manner—both of which I wish to reveal in what follows. But I will disclose the dictated works first, and afterward the others.
Thus he begins to write concerning the composition of books. Because it is delightful to make use of alternating things, not only to drive away the trouble of tedium but also to restore the powers of soul and body, I once endeavored to write sayings of diverse character, but now I wish to reveal what I have written.
For I produced three little books at different times and in different styles at first, which I wished to gather into one volume, as if at one table for those feasting—like the three dishes which holy Father Benedict commands to be provided for us dining in the Rule, so that whoever cannot be refreshed by one may be refreshed by another.
Therefore I trust in the Lord that anyone delighted with spiritual food will find in some of them something by which he may be spiritually refreshed.
But let these things be said generally about all. Now, however, I desire to reveal what the reason was for writing each one, so that the reader, instructed to some extent from this, may know that I have by no means labored in vain in such things.
Therefore the reason for writing the first little book, set forth in verse, to which I gave the title 'On Spiritual Doctrine,' was of this kind.
For when I once came to the life of monastic profession recovering from very great illness, then in a short time—more than is credible—I became well. Out of this wellness, fearing lest some spiritual harm should arise for me, I prayed to the Lord with intimate prayer that he would not allow me, placed in such wellness, to grow sluggish in useless idleness, but permit me to be tested by some temptation that he knew would be appropriate for me.
After this prayer not much time passed, and behold, various troubles of temptations approaching surrounded me so much that I sometimes feared I had prayed incautiously and had been heard more for destruction than for benefit.
But frequently reconsidering that apostolic saying: 'God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but will make with the temptation also a way out so that you may be able to endure'—
I labored not as much as I should have, but as much as I could with my frailty, with the Lord permitting and himself helping, lest I fall in the sight of my adversaries.
And so in such great trouble of temptation, which pressed all the more because greater bodily health was present, I began to consider in every way by what zeal and by what labor I might subject the body to the spirit.
For those things that I was taught to do commonly with the other brothers in the monastery, and also those things that I undertook of my own accord with special devotion by writing or reading, or even fasting, did not seem to afflict the body enough.
And when I considered for a long time by what zeal especially I might most aptly and constantly constrain myself placed in such great dangers, it occurred to my mind that I should occupy myself with some composition.
For I have often experienced that the lascivious mind of anyone scholastically trained can be constrained in nothing more than in the practice of composition.
Having taken this kind of occasion, then, I began to write a first little book—namely in metrical style, in which I exercised myself especially when I was in secular life.
Placing in it various sayings of spiritual doctrine, by which I instructed and strengthened myself alone against the temptations pressing upon me.
Or so that I might pay more attention to the extent of my wickedness, which I practiced commonly with other clerics in the world, and to the obstinacy that I retained there especially beyond many—and, having set it forth in writing, might recognize it should be washed away with greater penance.
I also inserted in the same little book a certain discourse set forth in a lamentable style, first indeed disputing concerning the various negligence and also avarice of clerics, then narrating concerning the miserable punishment of my wickedness enacted both spiritually and bodily.
For I was then ignorant in what place such sayings should be brought forth, which, though placed in verse, nevertheless were produced by me after other things, when I had begun to recognize something with more perceptive insight.
Because it is set forth in metrical words that are usually first presented by many to boys and beginners for learning letters.
I also decided to place it first so that from this anyone converted to the way of truth might take, as it were, a meal fitting for his conversion, and thus, refreshed with lighter food, might approach more aptly to take up the richer fare of sacred doctrine.
But the book of visions, although I wrote it after two others, I nevertheless placed second in order, so that that doctrine which was set forth in various sayings in the earlier booklet might also be strengthened in this one by various examples.
And so that the words sent ahead might cling more tenaciously to the mind, which are commended in what follows by greater testimony both of mercy and of divine severity—
In the manner, that is, of richer food, which is first cooked in pure water, then more carefully prepared by the addition of some vinegar or even pepper.
For words of gentleness alone brought forth in teaching can be understood as certain foods cooked only in water.
But when thereafter some examples of severity are mixed in, they are not inappropriately understood as dishes seasoned with the bitter addition of vinegar or pepper to make them more pleasing.
It is clear, therefore, that just as food cooked with both bitter and sweet seasonings is taken more eagerly, so also doctrine begun with enticements but then mixed with examples of some severity is heard more eagerly.
Hence also the Apostle, instructing any teacher, says: 'Argue, entreat, rebuke'—that is, mix enticements with terrors.
Having thus prefaced these things about the second book in order, now I wish to add where and on what occasion it was written.
When, therefore, I saw our monastery established in the city of Regensburg being destroyed by various persecutions of bishops, and remained there for thirty years hoping for better things, by the hidden judgment of God it turned out far differently than I hoped.
How such great destruction occurred, because it cannot be briefly stated, nor do I wish to set forth such great follies here, I leave to be brought forth by others.
Narrating only this: that when I perceived the external and internal goods of our monastery to be completely destroyed, and I could do nothing against these things—indeed, accused before the bishop by certain young brothers to whom I was displeasing, I often heard that various threats were being made against me by him and his associates—
Then, having sought permission from the abbot, I proceeded to the monastery of Fulda as if about to return soon.
Nevertheless, I do not doubt that no one could have brought such destruction upon us unless permitted by the just judgment of God and our sins demanding it.
Which is clearly given to be understood from this: that in the very year of my departure, which was the year ten sixty-two from the incarnation of the Lord, our monastery was consumed by a fire to be pitied and always mourned.
Therefore, placed in the monastery of Fulda and having obtained there the gift of desired tranquility and charity, I frequently considered how I might give thanks to God—from whom it was given to me—for the grace of that same tranquility.
For it seemed great to me then to be able to walk with peaceful steps in that same monastery.
Therefore, turning my mind entirely to giving thanks to God, and seeking for a long time if any suitable material for composition might occur, I finally found a certain occasion for composition—namely visions, which I once saw myself and heard from others as I traveled through various places.
For I judged it useful to bring these to the knowledge of many, because I believe it pertains to all people whenever anyone is visited by God, either through chastisement or through consolation, as he himself says in the Gospel: 'What I say to one, I say to all.'
I was also urged to write from this: that since I had formerly published two little books, I often wished to add a third for the honor of the Holy Trinity, if that Trinity itself would deign to inspire me.
Urged therefore by such a reason, I strove to write the book of visions of which I have already spoken.
But the third little book, which I wrote about fifteen years ago, I believe—why I placed it in the last order must first be explained, then on what occasion it was written must be added.
Because the custom of many dining with careful meals is that in the first and second course they order somewhat inferior dishes (which we do not call inferior as if they were worthless, but because they are less than the best), but in the last course richer dishes, prepared with some special art.
Desiring in this to serve not so much their own appetite as the delight and honor of others who happen to be invited to the banquet.
I, on the contrary, wished unusually to place last some words of richer teaching before the face of readers, as if at a table of feasters, which any eager reader, though set forth in an unworthy style yet retaining the dignity of noble subject matter, could taste as rich fare.
For what teaching can be richer and sweeter than concerning the grace of God, and why grace must be believed and spoken of; also how true, just, and necessary are God's judgments;
And also to inquire with all efforts and to prove with many testimonies how great a capacity for acting well we have been granted by God?
These three things I set forth through the solutions of three questions in that book, which I placed in third order, in the style I could manage through dialogue, desiring by this number and order to venerate the Holy Trinity.
But I also strove to venerate the same Trinity in this: that in the third question—which, like certain choice dishes woven together with wise custom and brought last to those sitting at the supper of reading, I set forth—
I discussed the Holy Trinity and Unity itself according to the strength of my understanding, briefly and openly and (I hope) provedly by various examples and arguments of reason.
I also hope that in the same little book I have brought forth for all—whether placed in secular or spiritual life—some words of edification, through which any who hunger and thirst for righteousness can be refreshed.
Let these things be said concerning the last book in order, to which I gave the title: 'On Three Questions'—that is, on the recognition of divine mercy and the diversity of divine judgments, as well as on the varied capacity for acting well.
Then we add on what occasion it was written.
For a certain monk from the monastery of Reichenau, born of the most noble stock of the Alemanni, named Henry, when he was returning from Jerusalem, was our guest for some time.
Therefore, because he was quite studious in sacred Scripture, he frequently approached me as a teacher, humbly asking that I explain to him certain sayings of sacred Scripture.
But I, noticing the humility and persistence of his request, as I was able, responded to whatever he asked.
And when this conversation held between us often pleased him, finally he began to request that I write down the same conversation.
Though I delayed this for a long time both out of laziness and ignorance, I finally undertook it, writing indeed through dialogue, but without the author's name and without identifying letters for the characters, lest it easily appear whose work it was.
Meanwhile he, summoned to his monastery, departed, and after not much time returned to us again.
Then, seeing what I had begun to write and how I had sketched it out, he especially asked that I both illuminate the reason for writing with a prologue and reveal the memory of both persons—namely myself and himself—in the dialogue.
Which I soon strove to fulfill by writing, as I was able.
This, therefore, was the reason that made me write the Dialogue. I have revealed it so that I may not seem to add writings to writings in vain, and so that, the charity by which I was impelled to write being known, anyone into whose hands this book comes may be urged by the same charity to read.
Let these things be said about the above-mentioned books, which I wished to compose into one. Now I also freely disclose on what occasion I endeavored to write other little books.
When therefore, fleeing the persecution that I had suffered in our monastery (as mentioned above), I came to the monastery of Fulda, and remained there for four years with great tranquility,
I was asked by certain brothers of that monastery to pursue the practice of composing and writing, so that I might produce something easier than the Life of Saint Boniface, which was set forth in difficult style.
This request, although I refused for a long time, nevertheless compelled by persistent prayers, I finally fulfilled as I was able.
For such a reason, then, I readily wrote the book of Saint Boniface. I also published another little book which I called the 'Manual,' written for the admonition of clerics and laypeople while I was situated there.
Likewise, I began to write a little book of Proverbs while situated in that same monastery.
But when I was recalled to my homeland by constant letters through certain brothers of our monastery, I did not wish to return quickly because of the request of those brothers among whom I was then living (for they begged with every kind of prayer that I not abandon them)—I finally obtained permission to return from them with difficulty.
Nevertheless, I did not wish to arrive at our monastery first until I explored by certain signs how all things were being conducted there. For this reason I proceeded to the monastery called Amorbach, wishing to wait there until I became certain about the condition of our monastery.
And when I was received by the abbot of that monastery with all humanity and kindness, and constant conversation about many questions of sacred Scripture was conducted between us, and my response had very often pleased him,
It happened that near the Easter feast he said to me: 'Believe me that if I could command you anything, without doubt I would command that you give a sermon to the people at this approaching solemnity.'
To whom I responded, saying: 'Why do you say such things to me, who know nothing of this matter, who have never been accustomed to address the people in public?'
But when he repeated the same thing, I soon began to think within myself, saying: 'What would I do if someone whose commands I would not presume to transgress commanded such things of me?'
Therefore such a work must be undertaken by me voluntarily, before I am compelled by someone powerful, so that I may thus prove what I would do.
And immediately, taking up my pen, I began to write in the manner of a sermon, taking the beginning from the saying of the Psalmist: 'The Lord looks down from heaven upon the children of men.' These words I strengthened as much as I could with arguments from similitudes, believing that through these some would be edified.
To which work I gave the title: 'How One Should Read in Visible Things.'
But when I remained in that same place for almost a year, messengers sent from our monastery came, with whom I then returned to my homeland.
These things having been said, I will also tell on what occasion I wrote the other little books.
For at the request of our brothers, I wrote—emending the Life of Saint Nicholas as well as of Saint Wolfgang, as is indicated in the prologue of each life—before I set out for the monastery of Fulda.
But also the Life of Saint Alto, together with certain verses pertaining to the same saint.
But after I returned, I wrote the Life of Saint Magnus, compelled by the intimate and persistent prayers of two brothers—namely Wilhelm from our congregation, and another who came to us from the monastery of Saint Magnus for the sake of learning, called Adalham, who is now established as abbot in the monastery of Saint Afra.
But after these things, when I both saw and heard everywhere the destruction of Christian religion, the negligence of rulers and princes toward their subjects—whether placed in spiritual or secular life—and constantly grieved for such things,
I began to think that, since no one deigned to hear me speaking in common discourse and grieving for such great misery, I might at least by writing bring forth some words of sacred Scripture by which I could edify some.
For this reason, therefore, I wrote the last book also of my work, to which I gave the title: 'On the Spiritual Course.'
In which book I set forth by writing as much as I could run through the field of sacred Scripture, especially through the Psalter and the Gospel.
Among these things I also wrote certain sermons as well as letters for the common good, which if anyone should wish to read, he will be able to find with us.
I also wrote several years ago a book 'On the Confession of My Deeds,' so that if any illness or sudden death should prevent me in my last moments from due confession, I might at least through writings reveal who I was of myself and who by God's grace.
I wish also to bring forth the words of two prayers. For often considering that I led many astray by wicked examples, I strove to write such words of prayer in which anyone can be sufficiently taught how he ought to pray for himself and for others.
Which prayers, since they are already held by certain persons, I did not wish to transcribe in this little work.
But these prayers and the other things brought forth above concerning the gift of composition must all the more be attributed to divine mercy, the more it is known that I, once devoted to very many vices, deserved none of these things.
But I have brought forth these things so that, according to what the Lord himself commanded in the Gospel to a certain demoniac freed by him, saying: 'Go to your home and tell how much God has done for you,' I too might narrate how many benefits God has shown me.
Hence I wish also to narrate how much knowledge and how great a capacity for writing was given to me by the Lord in my early age.
When therefore I was handed over as a small boy to scholastic discipline and had learned letters quickly, I also began to learn the art of writing far before the usual time of learning, without the command of a teacher.
For in a stealthy and unusual manner, and also without a teacher, I strove to grasp that same art of writing.
From which it happened that I became accustomed to hold the pen for writing in incorrect use, nor could I afterward be corrected on this by any teacher.
For excessive habit prevented me from amending it. When many saw this, they all said I would never write well.
But it turned out otherwise by the grace of God, as is known to very many.
For when in boyhood, at the very time when a writing tablet was given to me with other boys for learning writing, I seemed to know how to write something, I provided no small wonder to those watching.
Then indeed after not a long time I began to write so well, and had such great affection for this, that even in that place where I learned such things—that is, in the monastery called Tegernsee—I had written many books.
And transferred to Francia while still a boy, and there I labored so much in writing many things that, returning from there, I had almost been deprived of sight.
Therefore I decided to bring forth these things so that I might incite some to similar affection for laboring, and by narrating to others the grace of God, which provided such great benefits to me, I might draw them to magnify with me that same grace of God.
And to do this more fully, I wish to bring forth how much I labored in writing afterward, when I had returned from Francia—for I was there when Emperor Henry died and Conrad became king.
After therefore I came to the monastery of Saint Emmeram for conversion, soon urged by the request of certain persons, I was occupied again with such great zeal for writing that rarely, except on feast days or at other unsuitable hours, did I cease from this work.
Meanwhile another labor also followed. For because I seemed often to read, or write, or compose, the care of students was committed to me.
From all of which indeed I was so bound by the grace of God that often I was not permitted to give my body to necessary rest.
And when the practice of composition was present, I most often did not have time for this except on feast days or at night, constrained both by the care of boys for teaching and by the request of those for whom I began to write, for writing.
Therefore, besides the little books composed by me, which I wrote both voluntarily and when asked to be given for the edification of others, I wrote nineteen Missals—
Ten indeed for abbots or brothers placed in our monastery, four for brothers of Fulda, and five for those dwelling in other places.
Also three Gospel books, and two with Epistles and Gospels, which are called Lectionaries. Besides these I also wrote four books for Matins.
Afterward old age and various illness prevented me, and especially the long unrest that grew in me over many periods from various cares and grief arising from the destruction of our monastery.
But to him who bestows every good thing and alone governs all things, and who granted very many gifts to me, unworthy—to him be eternal praise, to him be honor through all ages.
I also wish to bring forth, as much as I can remember, how many books I handed over to certain monasteries or friends.
And first indeed I wish to name the brothers of Fulda, because since I labored especially among them, writing many books that I handed over to our monastery, therefore among us also I wrote books that they themselves did not have.
For I handed over to them, as I remember, seven little books, but to those of Hersfeld two books.
And when I had returned from those parts and come to Amorbach, I handed over one book to the abbot of that place.
Later, however, having set out with our brother Wilhelm, I gave him four books, among which was a quite precious Missal.
To the abbot of Lorsch one book; to the abbot of Ebersberg one book; to certain friends situated in Bohemia four books; to a certain friend situated in Passau one book.
To the monastery of Tegernsee two books; to the monastery of Prüfening situated near us one volume, in which were three books.
But also to my sister's son situated there I gave one book and various letters.
Also to the Upper Monastery three books; to the Lower Monastery I gave one book.
Moreover, I gave or sent at some time to many others sermons or proverbs, or certain writings of edification.
But I have brought forth such signs of my labor here so that I might convert some monks devoted to idleness and incite them to some work fitting for monastic life.
For if they cannot do such great things, they can do easier things.