Explanation of the Creed by Saint Nicetas, Bishop of Aquileia, Given to the Competents.

Whoever believes in Christ and follows Him to the true life, just as the people of Israel followed Moses and entered the promised land, confidently renounces the enemy and his angels, and all magical curiosities, which are known through the angels of Satan. Then, they renounce his evil deeds, idolatry, fortune-telling, omens, shows, theaters, fornications, drunkenness, dance parties, and lies. These and other serpentine things bind the souls of people and lead to the prison of hell. Therefore, freeing oneself from these evils, a person casts off these chains, throwing them behind their back as if into the face of the enemy, and now proclaims with a sincere voice. I believe in God the Father Almighty. The confession rightly begins with belief, because this is how blessed Paul expressed it: "For with the heart one believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation" (Romans 10:10). Therefore, you believe in God the Father Almighty: the unbegotten God, who was not born from anyone, who began from no one: the invisible God, whom no eye of flesh can see: the incomprehensible God, who comprehends all: the immutable God, who is not changed by times, nor ages, but is always the same: who did not begin to live in time, but always living, suffers no successor: the good and just Creator of heaven and earth. You confess this God, but it is necessary to also confess Him as the Father of the Son: for no one is a Father without a Son: therefore, the Father is through the Son, having indeed a Son, of whom He is the Father. And this is the pious confession in God; that you know Him not only as God but also as the Father, the Father of the living Word, of His own power and wisdom: who before all ages, before the beginning of all, before all time, begot the Son from Himself, Spirit from Spirit, God from God; in whom everything in heaven and on earth is created; visible and invisible, as Paul teaches in the Letter to the Colossians.

As stated in First Corinthians, "Everything was made through him, and without him, nothing was made."
Therefore, believing in God the Father, you will immediately confess to believing in His Son, Jesus Christ.
This is the Son of God, Jesus Christ.
In the Hebrew language, Jesus means Savior.
Christ, however, is a title of royal dignity, like savior and king, one and the same, Christ Jesus.
He came down from the Father from heaven for our salvation and took on a body like ours.
Born of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary without any action of a man:
The body was born of the body, by the power of the Holy Spirit; remaining God, he became man.
So that he could be a salvation to humans both visually and doctrinally, because otherwise divinity could not be sustained by humans except through the visible assumption of a body.
Therefore, born of the holy and undefiled Virgin, to provide us with the beginning of a holy birth.
He was born, as was previously foretold by the prophet: "Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and his name shall be called Emmanuel, which is interpreted, God with us" (Isaiah 7:14; Matthew 1:23).
Believe, therefore, that he, who was born of a Virgin, is God with us; God from before the ages from the Father; man from the Virgin for the sake of mankind.
Truly incarnated, not merely imagined, as some erroneous heretics, embarrassed by the mystery of God, say that the incarnation of the Lord happened as a phantom.
Because what seemed to be was not real, but deceived the eyes of men.
May this be far from the truth of God.
For if the incarnation is false, the salvation of men will also be false.
But if there is true salvation in Christ, the incarnation is equally true.
In him exists both; man, which was seen; God, which was not seen.
Eating as a man, and feeding five thousand people with five loaves, because he is God.
Sleeping as a man in a boat, but commanding the winds and the sea, because he is God.
Nailing hands to the cross as a man; but granting paradise to the thief who confessed to him, because he is God.

Finally accepting death, he laid down his body for a short time as a human; but he raised a man who had been dead for four days from the tomb, because he is God. Therefore, Christ must be believed to be both God and man: just as he is recognized as man through his sufferings, he is revealed as God through his divine works.
You have a reason to reject false teachers. If anyone tries to whisper to you that Christ was only a man, tell them he took on human form through the aforementioned actions; and I have already recognized him through his virtues and declarations, as the Savior himself said to the Jews:
"If you do not want to believe me, at least believe the works. And understand that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me" (John 10:38).
It follows that you should believe in the Lord's passion and confess that Christ suffered and was crucified by the Jews, as foretold by the prophets. And see that you do not feel ashamed of your Lord's suffering.
If perhaps the disbelief of the Jews or the foolishness of the nations wishes to blaspheme about the glorious cross of Christ, always remember the saying of the Lord:
"Whoever confesses me before men, I will also confess him before my Father who is in heaven" (Matthew 10:32).
And indeed, there is no reason to be embarrassed if you understand in what mystery Christ suffered.
He suffered not in his divinity, but in his flesh. For God is always impassible. However, he suffered in the flesh, as the apostle teaches (First Peter 4:1),
so that through his wound, salvation might come to the human race: as the prophet Isaiah had also predicted.
And he says, "He suffered for our sins, and by his wound, we are all healed" (Isaiah 53:5).
For it was for our sin that Christ suffered, so that righteousness might be granted to us. Therefore, he suffered under Pontius Pilate.
The time is indicated when Pontius Pilate was the governor of Syria and Palestine.
This is carefully noted because some heretics, deceived by demonic frauds, speak of different Christs.
Thus, you are also taught the time of the passion; so that you may confess that it was truly Christ who suffered under Pontius Pilate for the salvation of the world, and not any other figure.
He died to break the bonds of death.

On the third day, he rose alive from the dead, as the prophet says, "among the dead, free" (Psalm 88:7). Neither could Christ be held by death, who holds all power over death and life. He ascended into heaven, from where he had also descended, because, he says, "No one has ascended into heaven except the one who descended from heaven, the Son of Man who was in heaven" (John 10:18; John 3:13).
He sits at the right hand of the Father, according to what is said in the Psalms from the perspective of God the Father to the Son: "Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet" (Psalm 109:8). From there he will come to judge the living and the dead. Believe that this very Christ, our Lord, will come with their angels and powers, to judge both the living and those who were dead, to repay each according to their deeds, that is, to grant eternal life to the just, but to subject the wicked to eternal punishment.
You also believe in the Holy Spirit. This Holy Spirit is one, sanctifying all, who proceeds from the Father, alone searching the mysteries and depths of God, who came upon Christ in the form of a dove from heaven. This Holy Spirit is indeed one, but manifold in powers and operations. He distributes gifts of grace to each as he wills (First Corinthians 12:11). He appoints prophets, fills apostles, and at the time of baptism, he sanctifies the souls and bodies of believers, without whose work no creature can reach eternity, into whose glory even angels long to peer (First Peter 1:12).
He sanctifies thrones and dominions, and all the powers of heaven by his majesty. Whoever blasphemes against this Holy Spirit will not have forgiveness, neither in this age nor in the age to come, as the Lord himself declared (Matthew 12:32).

Brothers, hold firmly in your hearts this faith in the Trinity,
believing in one God the Father almighty, and in His Son,
Jesus Christ our Lord, and in the Holy Spirit, the true light
and the one who makes souls holy. He is the guarantee of our
inheritance. If we stay focused on Him, He will lead us into
all truth and make us sharers in heavenly things.
This is the rule of faith that the apostles received from the
Lord: that they should baptize all believing nations in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit
(Matthew 28:19).
Let this faith stay with you. Guard this treasure,
dearest ones, avoiding godless new ways of speaking and
arguments of false knowledge (1 Timothy 6:20).
If pagans try to persuade you to worship many fathers again,
you hold on to your blessed confession, because you have
confessed one God the Father. Nature does not allow one
man to have many fathers.
If a Jew tries to persuade you not to believe that Christ is
the Son of God, treat him like an enemy - either argue with
him if you are skilled in Scripture, or avoid him if you are
not.
If someone claiming to be a Christian tells you that Christ is
just a creature, or that the Holy Spirit is not part of the
glory of the Father and the Son, treat him like a pagan and
a tax collector. He is leading you toward idolatry by trying
to make you worship a creature.
And when he tries to trap you in tricky questions, go back to
the wall of your faith and say with the Apostle:
I have been washed clean, I have been made holy, I have
been made right in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and
in the Spirit of my God (1 Corinthians 6:11).
I will not give up anything about this profession of the
Trinity, so that I do not harm my salvation or damage my
faith.
After you confess the blessed Trinity, you now also say that
you believe in the holy catholic Church. What is the Church
except the gathering of all the saints?

From the beginning of the world, whether it be the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or the prophets, or the apostles, or the martyrs, or other righteous ones who have been, who are, or who will be, they are one Church.
This is because they were sanctified by one faith and way of life, marked by one spirit, and have become one body, of which Christ is the head, as it is testified and written in Colossians 1:18.
Furthermore, I say even more. Even angels, even the heavenly powers and authorities, are united in this one Church; as the Apostle teaches us, because in Christ, all things have been reconciled, not only those on earth but also those in heaven, as stated in Colossians 1:20.
Therefore, believe that in this one Church, you will gain the communion of saints. Know that this is the one Catholic Church established throughout the whole world, whose communion you must firmly hold onto.
There are indeed other pseudo-churches, but you have nothing in common with them; for instance, those of the Manichaeans, the Cataphrygians, the Marcionites, or other heretics or schismatics. These churches have ceased to be holy because, deceived by demonic doctrines, they believe and act differently than what the Lord Christ commanded and what the apostles handed down.
You also believe in the forgiveness of sins. This is the grace by which believers, confessing God in Christ, obtain through baptism the forgiveness of all their sins. Hence, it is also called regeneration, because a person is rendered more innocent and pure than when they are born from their mother's womb.
Consequently, you believe in the resurrection of your body and in eternal life. Indeed, if you do not believe this, you believe in God in vain. For everything we believe is for the sake of our resurrection. Otherwise, if we have hope in Christ only in this life, truly, as the Apostle says, we are more miserable than all people, as stated in First Corinthians 15:19, since Christ surely took on human flesh to impart the communion of eternal life to our mortal substance.

There are indeed many heretics who distort the faith in the resurrection, claiming salvation only for the soul and denying the resurrection of the flesh. But you, who believe in Christ, profess the resurrection of your flesh. For this is why Christ died and rose again, to be the Lord of both the living and the dead.
As stated in the book of Romans, chapter 14, verse 9.
And you certainly do not believe this in vain. You have reliable authorities.
Consider the prophet Isaiah clearly proclaiming:
"The dead will rise, and those who are in the tombs will rise, and those who are in the earth will be awakened."
From the book of Isaiah, chapter 26, verse 19.
You also have the Lord of the prophets himself promising in the Gospel:
"I am the resurrection and the life; whoever believes in me, even if they die, will live."
As stated in the Gospel of John, chapter 11, verse 27.
And in another place:
"Amen, I say to you, the hour is coming when the dead in the tombs will hear the voice of the Son of God; and those who have done good will rise to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment."
From the Gospel of John, chapter 5, verses 28 to 29.
You have the apostle Paul asserting:
"For this perishable body must put on the imperishable, and this mortal body must put on immortality."
From First Corinthians, chapter 15, verse 53.
Know that we are made of two substances, namely, body and soul. The body is mortal, but the soul is immortal.
When a person departs from this life, it is not the soul that dies, but with its departure, only the body dies; and while the body decays in the earth, the soul is reserved according to its merit either in a place of light or in a place of darkness.
So that on the day of the Lord's coming from heaven, when he comes with his holy angels, with all the risen, the souls will be called back into their bodies, and there will be a just separation of the good and the bad.
Then the righteous will shine like the sun in their Father's kingdom; but the wicked and unjust will go into the darkness of hell, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, as it is written.
To prevent any doubt about the resurrection of the body, consider even a single example from worldly things, as the Apostle teaches.
From First Corinthians, chapter 15, verse 36.
Look at a grain of wheat, dead and dry, sown in the ground; and when it is soaked with the dew of heaven and has decayed, then it is brought to life and rises.

I believe that the one who revives a grain of wheat for the sake of a human can also resurrect the human sown in the earth. Indeed, he can and wants to.
For just as rain revives the grain, so the body is to be given life by the dew of the Spirit.
As Isaiah cries out to Christ, "For the dew from you is their healing" (Isaiah 26:19).
Truly healing, because the resurrected bodies of the saints no longer fear death.
They will live with Christ in heaven, those who have lived according to Christ's commandments and justice in this world.
This is the eternal, blessed life that you believe in.
This is the fruit of all faith and good behavior.
This is the hope for which we are born, believe, and are reborn.
For this reason, prophets, apostles, and martyrs endured such unbearable labors and accepted death with joy.
This life will not be had by a pagan or possessed by an unbelieving Jew.
Nor will it be for a Christian serving vices and crimes, because it is prepared only for the faithful and those living chastely.
Therefore, my dear ones, remain in what you have learned and what has been handed down to you.
Always keep the covenant you made with the Lord, that is, this creed, which you confess before angels and humans.
The words are few, but they contain all the sacraments.
For these have been gathered from all the Scriptures for the sake of brevity, like precious gems set in one crown.
Since many of the faithful do not know the letters, or those who do know them cannot read the Scriptures due to worldly occupations, they may have sufficient saving knowledge.
Therefore, my dear ones, whether you sit, work, sleep, or stay awake, may this saving confession be in your hearts.
Let your mind always be in heaven, hope in the resurrection, and desire in the promise.

The cross of Christ and His glorious passion should be held up with confidence.
Whenever the enemy stirs your mind with fear, greed, or anger, respond to him threateningly, saying:
I have renounced you, and I continue to renounce you, along with your works and your angels.
Because I have believed in the living God and His Christ, by whose Spirit I am sealed and have learned no longer to fear death.
Thus, the hand of God will protect you, and the Spirit of Christ will guard your holy entrance, from now on and forever.
As you reflect on Christ, say to each other: brothers, whether we are awake or asleep, let us live together with the Lord;
to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.

