
by Peter Abelard
Patrologia Latina Volume 


Peter Abelard's Ethics, or the Book Called Know Yourself.

This text was discovered from a manuscript in the imperial monastery of Saint Emmeram in Regensburg, of the Order of Saint Benedict, by the Reverend Father Benedict Bonetus, a Benedictine of Melk. It was published by Bernard Pez in his Treasury of Anecdotes, volume three, part two, page six hundred and twenty-six.

Prologue.

By moral character we mean the vices or virtues of the soul that make us prone to evil or good actions. But vices and good qualities belong not only to the soul but also to the body, such as bodily weakness or strength, which we call physical power, sluggishness or speed, lameness or uprightness, blindness or sight.
Therefore, to distinguish these from such bodily conditions, when we say vices, we specify vices of the soul. These vices of the soul are opposed to virtues, as injustice to justice, cowardice to constancy, intemperance to temperance.

Chapter one: On the vice of the soul that pertains to moral character.

There are also certain vices or good qualities of the soul that are separate from moral character and do not make human life worthy of blame or praise, such as dullness of mind or quickness of intellect, being forgetful or having a good memory, ignorance or knowledge.
Since all these qualities happen equally to the wicked as to the good, they have nothing to do with the formation of moral character and do not make life shameful or honorable. Therefore we did well when, having first said vices of the soul, we added to exclude such qualities: those that make us prone to evil actions, that is, those that incline the will toward something that is not fitting to do or to leave undone.

Chapter two: What is the difference between sin and the vice that inclines toward evil?

Now this kind of vice of the soul is not the same thing as sin, nor is sin the same thing as an evil action. For example, being irascible, that is, being prone or easily moved to the disturbance of anger, is a vice and inclines the mind to do something impulsively and irrationally, which is not fitting.
But this vice exists in the soul, making one prone to anger, even when one is not moved to anger, just as lameness, which makes a person lame, exists in him even when he is not walking with a limp, because the vice is present even when the action is absent.
Similarly, nature itself or bodily temperament makes many people prone to lust as well as to anger. Yet they do not sin simply by being such people, but rather they have material for struggle, so that by triumphing over themselves through the virtue of temperance they may receive the crown, according to that saying of Solomon: Better is the patient person than the strong warrior, and one who rules his own spirit than one who conquers cities.
For religion considers it shameful to be conquered by vice, not by another human being. Being human is common even to good people; it is in vice that we decline from what we should be. The Apostle, commending this victory to us, says: No one will be crowned unless he has competed lawfully. He has competed, I say, not so much by resisting other people as by resisting vices, lest they drag us into wicked consent.
Even if other people cease to attack us, vices do not cease, so that their battle is more dangerous the more constant it is, and victory is more glorious the more difficult it is.
But other people, however much they may prevail against us, bring no shame to our lives unless, in the manner of vices and as if turning us into vices themselves, they subject us through shameful consent. When they dominate the body, as long as the mind remains free, nothing of true freedom is endangered, and we incur nothing of disgraceful servitude.
For it is shameful to serve vice, not to serve another human being. It is not bodily slavery but subjection to vices that defiles the soul, since whatever is common equally to good and evil people has nothing to do with virtue or vice.

Chapter three: What is a vice of the soul and what is properly called sin?

Vice, therefore, is that by which we are made prone to sin, that is, we are inclined to consent to what is not fitting, so that we either do it or leave it undone. This consent we properly call sin, that is, the fault of the soul by which it deserves damnation or is established as guilty before God.
For what is this consent but contempt of God and an offense against Him? God cannot be offended by any loss, but He can be offended by contempt. He is that supreme power who is not diminished by any loss, but who avenges contempt of Himself.
Therefore our sin is contempt of the Creator, and to sin is to despise the Creator, that is, not to do for His sake what we believe should be done for His sake, or not to refrain for His sake from what we believe should be refrained from.
When we define sin negatively, saying it is not doing or not refraining from what is fitting, we clearly show that sin has no substance, that it subsists in non-being rather than being, just as if we were defining darkness we would say: the absence of light where light ought to be.
But perhaps you will say that the will to do evil is also sin, which makes us guilty before God, just as the will to do good makes us just, so that just as virtue consists in good will, so sin consists in evil will, and exists not only in non-being but also in being, just like virtue.
For just as by willing to do what we believe pleases God we please Him, so by willing to do what we believe displeases God we displease Him and seem to offend or despise Him.
But I say that if we consider this more carefully, we must think very differently about it than it appears. For since we sometimes sin without any evil will at all, and since evil will itself when restrained but not extinguished produces the palm of victory for those who resist and provides both the material for struggle and the crown of glory, it should be called not so much sin as a certain necessary weakness.
Consider this example: there is an innocent man whom his cruel master has attacked in such fury that he pursues him with drawn sword to kill him. The innocent man flees for a long time, avoiding his own death as much as he can, but finally, compelled and unwilling, he kills his master to avoid being killed by him.
Tell me, whoever you are, what evil will did he have in this deed? For in wanting to escape death, he wanted to preserve his own life. But was this will evil? No, you say, I don't think so, but rather the will he had concerning killing his pursuing master.
I respond: You speak well and cleverly, if you could identify a will in what you assert. But as already stated, he did this unwillingly and under compulsion, having delayed killing as long as he could while preserving his life, knowing also that this killing would bring danger to his own life. How then did he do this voluntarily when he committed it even at the risk of his own life?
But if you respond that this too was done from will, since it is clear he was led to this from the will to escape death, not to kill his master, we do not refute this at all. But as already stated, this will, through which he wanted to escape death rather than kill his master, as you say, should in no way be condemned as evil.
And yet he did wrong by consenting, although compelled by fear of unjust death, to a killing that he ought rather to have suffered than inflicted. For he took up the sword on his own authority; he did not receive it from legitimate power. Hence the Truth says: Everyone who takes up the sword will perish by the sword, that is, he incurs damnation and the death of his own soul from this rash action.
Therefore, as stated, he wanted to escape death, not to kill his master. But because he consented to the killing, which he should not have done, this unjust consent of his that preceded the killing was the sin.
But if someone should say: Because he wanted to kill his master in order to escape death, one cannot simply infer from this that he wanted to kill him, just as if I say to someone: I want you to have my cloak so that you will give me five shillings, or: I gladly want it to become yours for this price, I do not thereby concede that I want it to be yours simpliciter.
Similarly, if someone imprisoned wants to place his son there in his stead so that the son may seek his ransom, do we thereby concede simply that he wants to send his son into prison, when he is forced to endure this with great tears and many groans?
Certainly such a so-called will, which consists in great pain of soul, should not be called will but rather suffering. And it is like this: because he wants this for the sake of that, as if it were said that he endures what he does not want for the sake of what he desires.
So also a sick person is said to be burned or cut in order to be healed, and martyrs to suffer in order to reach Christ, and Christ Himself suffered so that we might be saved by His passion. Yet we are not thereby forced to concede simply that they want this. For there can be no suffering unless something happens contrary to the will, nor does anyone suffer in that in which he fulfills his will and which delights him to have happen.
And certainly the Apostle, who says: I desire to depart and be with Christ, that is, to die in order to reach Him, elsewhere says: We do not wish to be unclothed but to be clothed over, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. Blessed Augustine also recalls this saying spoken by the Lord to Peter: You will stretch out your hands and another will gird you and lead you where you do not want to go.
Christ also, according to the weakness of the human nature He assumed, said to the Father: If it is possible, let this cup pass from me, yet not as I will but as You will. For His soul naturally feared the great suffering of death, nor could what He knew to be painful be voluntary for Him.
Since Scripture elsewhere says of Him: He was offered because He Himself willed it, this must be understood either according to His divine nature, in whose will it was that the assumed human nature should suffer, or willed is used for ordained, according to the Psalmist's saying: Whatever He willed He did.
It is therefore clear that sin is sometimes committed without any evil will at all, so that from this it is evident that sin is not to be identified with will.
This is how we should understand what the Lord says: 'Whoever looks at a woman to lust after her,' which is to say in Matthew's Gospel, chapter five, verse twenty-eight. This means: whoever looks in such a way that he falls into consent to lust has already committed adultery in his heart, even if he has not committed adultery in deed. That is, he already bears the guilt of sin, even though he still lacks the outward effect.
If we consider carefully, wherever works seem to be included under a commandment or prohibition, these should be referred more to the will or consent regarding works than to the works themselves. Otherwise, nothing pertaining to merit would be placed under a commandment. And commandments would be less worthy of being commanded to the degree that they are less established in our power. For there are many things from which we are forbidden to act, but we always have the will and consent in our own control.
Consider this: the Lord says in Deuteronomy, chapter five, verses seventeen and twenty: 'You shall not kill. You shall not bear false witness.' If we understand these as referring only to the action, as the words sound, then guilt is by no means forbidden, nor is fault thus prohibited, but rather the action of the fault. For killing a man is not itself a sin, nor is sleeping with another man's wife, since these can sometimes be committed without sin. Indeed, if someone wants to give false testimony or even consents to giving it, as long as he does not actually say it for whatever reason and remains silent, he does not become guilty under the law, if such a prohibition is understood to concern the work, as the words sound.
For it was not said that we should not want to give false testimony or that we should not consent to giving it, but only that we should not say it. Or when the law forbids us to marry our sisters or have intercourse with them, no one could keep this commandment, since no one can recognize his own sisters. No one, I say, if the prohibition concerns the act rather than consent.
When it happens therefore that someone through ignorance marries his sister, is he a transgressor of the commandment because he does what the law forbids him to do? He is not a transgressor, you will say, because he did not consent to transgression in what he did unknowingly. Just as therefore one who does what is forbidden should not be called a transgressor, but rather one who consents to what is known to be forbidden, so too the prohibition should be understood not as concerning the work, but as concerning consent. So that when it is said 'Do not do this or that,' it means 'Do not consent to doing this or that,' as if it were said 'Do not knowingly presume to do this.'
Blessed Augustine, carefully considering this and reducing all sin or prohibition to charity, or rather to covetousness, rather than to works, says: 'The law commands nothing except charity and prohibits nothing except covetousness.' Hence also the Apostle says in Paul's letter to the Romans, chapter thirteen, verses eight and ten: 'The whole law is fulfilled in one saying: You shall love your neighbor as yourself.' And again: 'Love is the fulfillment of the law.' For it makes no difference to merit whether you give alms to someone in need and charity makes you ready to give, and the will is present when the means is lacking, nor does it remain in you to do what you can, by whatever chance you are prevented.
For it is established that works which ought to be done or not done are performed equally by good men as by evil men, whom intention alone separates. For in the same deed, as that teacher mentioned, in which we see God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, we also see Judas the traitor. For the handing over of the Son was done by God the Father, it was done also by the Son, and it was done by that traitor: since both the Father handed over the Son, and the Son handed over himself, as the Apostle mentions in Paul's letter to the Romans, chapter eight, verse thirty-two, and his letter to the Galatians, chapter two, verse twenty-one, and Judas handed over the Master.
Therefore the traitor did what God also did. But did he do it well? For even if it was good, it was certainly not done well or in a way that should benefit him. For God weighs not what is done, but with what spirit it is done. Nor does the merit or praise of the one working consist in the work, but in the intention. For often the same thing is done by different people: through the justice of one and through the wickedness of another. For instance, if two people hang one guilty man, one indeed from zeal for justice, the other from hatred of an old enmity, and though the action of hanging is the same, and each certainly does what is good to do and what justice demands, yet through the diversity of intention the same thing is done by different people, by one badly, by the other well.
Who finally is ignorant that the devil himself does nothing except what God permits him to do, when he either punishes the wicked according to their merits, or is permitted to afflict some just person for purification or as an example of patience? But because what God permits him to do, he does urged on by his own wickedness, thus his power is called good or even just, while his will is always unjust. For he receives the former from God, the latter he has from himself.
Who also among the elect, in those things which pertain to works, can be equaled to hypocrites? Who endures or does as much from love of God as they do from desire for human praise? Who finally does not know that sometimes things which God forbids to be done are rightly done or ought to be done, just as conversely he sometimes commands certain things which nevertheless are not fitting to be done?
Consider indeed, we know some of his miracles in which, when he had cured infirmities, he forbade them to be revealed, as an example of humility of course, lest anyone perhaps seek glory from a similar grace bestowed upon him. Yet nonetheless those who had received those benefits did not cease to make them public, to the honor of course of him who had both done those things and forbidden them to be revealed, concerning which it is written: 'The more he commanded them not to speak, the more they proclaimed it,' and so forth. Would you judge such people guilty of transgression, who acted against the command which they had received and did this even knowingly?
Who excuses them from transgression, except that they did nothing through contempt of the one commanding, which they decided to do for his honor? Tell me, I beseech you, did Christ command what ought not to have been commanded, or did they neglect what ought to have been kept? It was good to command what was not good to do. And certainly you would also accuse the Lord in the case of Abraham, to whom he first commanded the sacrifice of his son, which he himself afterward prohibited. Did not God rightly command that to be done which was not good to be done? For if it was good, how was it afterward prohibited? But if it was both good to command and good to prohibit (for God permits nothing without reasonable cause, much less consents to its being done), you see that the intention of the command alone, not the action of the deed, excuses God, when he rightly commanded what is not good to be done.
For God did not intend or command this to be done so that Abraham should sacrifice his son, but so that from this his obedience, and the constancy of his faith, or his love for him might be proven and left to us as an example. For the Lord himself afterward openly declares this when he says in the book of Genesis, chapter twenty-two, verse twelve: 'Now I know that you fear the Lord,' as if he openly said: 'I commanded this to you for this purpose, to which you showed yourself ready, so that I might make known to others what I myself had known about you before the ages.'
Therefore this intention of God was right in the deed that was not right. And thus his prohibition was right in those things we mentioned, which he prohibited for this purpose, not that the prohibition should be kept, but that examples might be given to us weak ones for avoiding vain glory. Therefore God commanded what was not good to be done, just as conversely he prohibited what was good to be done. And just as there intention excuses him, so here it excuses those who did not fulfill the command in action. For they knew that he had not commanded this so that it should be kept, but so that the aforementioned example might be set before us. Therefore, with the will of the commander preserved, they did not despise him whose will they understood themselves not to be contrary to.
If therefore we weigh works more than intention, we shall see that sometimes, not only wanting something done against God's command but even doing it, and this knowingly, occurs without any guilt of sin. Nor should will or action be called evil because it does not keep God's command in the work, when the intention of the one to whom the command is given does not differ from the will of the one commanding. For just as the intention of the one commanding excuses him who commands that to be done which nevertheless is not fitting to be done, so also the intention of charity excuses the one to whom the command is given.
So therefore, to gather together what has been said above in a brief conclusion, there are four things which we have set forth, so that we might carefully distinguish them from one another: namely the vice of the soul, which makes us prone to sin; and afterward sin itself, which we define as consent to evil or contempt of God; then evil will and evil operation. But just as willing is not the same as fulfilling the will, so sinning is not the same as completing sin. For the former should be understood as concerning the consent of the soul by which we sin, the latter as concerning the effect of the operation, when namely we fulfill in action that to which we previously consented.
When therefore we say that sin or temptation is carried out in three ways, namely by suggestion, delight, and consent, it should be understood thus: that we are frequently led to the operation of sin through these three things, just as happened to our first parents. For the persuasion of the devil preceded, when he promised immortality from tasting the forbidden tree. Delight followed, when the woman, seeing the tree was beautiful and understanding it was pleasant to eat, was inflamed with desire for it, seized by the pleasure of the food which she believed. When she should have restrained her desire in order to keep the commandment, she was drawn into sin by consenting.
And when she should have corrected that sin through repentance so as to merit forgiveness, she finally consummated it in deed. And thus she proceeded through three stages to the perpetration of sin. So also we frequently arrive not at sinning itself, but at the perpetration of sin, through these same stages: namely by suggestion, that is, by the exhortation of someone outside inciting us to do something which is not fitting. If we know that doing this thing is delightful, even before the deed itself our mind is seized by delight in the deed, and in the very thought we are tempted by delight.
When we assent to this delight through consent, we sin. Finally, through these three stages we arrive at the operation of sin.
There are those who wish suggestion of the flesh, even if the person suggesting is absent, to be included under the name of suggestion, as for instance if someone, having seen a woman, falls into desire for her. But this suggestion surely seems to be nothing other than delight. And indeed this delight, made as it were necessary, and other such delights, which we mentioned above are not sin, the Apostle calls human temptation when he says in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter ten, verse thirteen: 'Let no temptation seize you except what is human. But God is faithful, who will not permit you to be tempted beyond what you can bear, but will make with the temptation also a way out so that you may be able to endure it.'
Now temptation is generally called any inclination of the soul toward doing something which is not fitting, whether that be will or consent. But human temptation is called that without which human weakness can now scarcely or never subsist, such as carnal desire or the desire for delightful food, from which he who said this sought to be freed: 'Deliver me from my necessities, O Lord,' that is to say, from Psalm twenty-four, verse seventeen. This means: from these temptations of desires, which have become as it were natural and necessary, lest they draw me to consent, or when this life, full of temptations, is finished, I may wholly lack them.
Therefore what the Apostle says, 'Let no temptation seize you except what is human,' is a similar sentiment as if he said: If the soul is inclined by delight, which is, as we said, human temptation, let it not drag you all the way to consent, in which sin consists. As if someone were asking: By what virtue of ours could we resist these desires? God is faithful, he says, who will not permit you to be tempted. As if he were saying: In him rather should we trust than presume upon ourselves, who, promising us help, is truthful in all his promises, which is what it means for him to be faithful, so that faith should be placed in him concerning all things.
Then truly he does not permit us to be tempted beyond what we can bear, when through his mercy he so tempers this human temptation that it does not press toward sin more than we can bear, namely by resisting it. But then moreover he converts this very temptation to our advantage, while through it he so exercises us that afterward when it occurs, it may weigh upon us less. And now we fear less the assault of the enemy over whom we have already triumphed and know how to endure. For every battle which we have not yet experienced, we endure more heavily and fear more greatly. But when it has become customary for the victors, both its strength and fear vanish together.

Chapter Four: On the Suggestions of Demons

Now suggestions come not only from men, but also from demons, because these too sometimes incite us to sin not so much by words as by deeds. For being skilled in the nature of things both by subtlety of intellect and by long experience (whence they are called demons, that is, knowing ones), they know the natural powers of things, by which human weakness can easily be stirred to lust or to other impulses.
Thus too, with God permitting, they sometimes send people into illness and afterward confer remedies upon those begging them, and often when they cease to harm, they are believed to heal. Indeed, in Egypt they were permitted to work many wonders against Moses through magicians, and indeed by the natural power of things which they knew, they should be called not so much creators of what they made as composers. Just as if someone, following Virgil's instruction, should by effort make bees come forth from the pounded flesh of a bull, he should be called not so much a creator of bees as a preparer of nature.
Therefore from this skill in things which demons have in their natures, they stir us to lust or other passions of the soul, applying them to us by whatever art while we are ignorant, whether placing them in taste or in bedding, or in whatever way arranging them internally or externally. For there are many powers in herbs or seeds, or in the natures of both trees and stones, suitable for stirring or calming our souls, which those who knew them carefully could easily accomplish.

Chapter Five: Why the Works of Sin Are Punished More Than the Sin Itself

There are also those who are moved considerably when they hear us say that the work of sin is not properly called sin, or that it adds nothing to the increase of sin. Why is a more severe satisfaction imposed on penitents for the effect of the work than for the guilt of the fault? To these indeed I respond first: Why do they not especially wonder at the fact that sometimes a great penalty of satisfaction is imposed where no fault has intervened, and that we should sometimes punish those whom we know to be innocent?
Consider indeed: some poor woman has a nursing infant, and does not have enough clothing that she can provide for both the little one in the cradle and for herself. Therefore, moved by compassion for the infant, she places him next to her so that she may also warm him with her own garments, and finally, overcome by weakness and the force of nature, she is compelled to smother the one she embraces with the greatest love. Augustine says: 'Have charity and do what you will.' Yet when she comes to the bishop for satisfaction, a severe penalty is imposed upon her, not for a fault which she committed, but so that she herself afterward or other women may be made more cautious in providing for such situations.
Sometimes also it happens that someone is accused by his enemies before a judge, and such a charge is brought against him that the judge knows him to be innocent. Because however they press him and demand a hearing in court, on the appointed day they enter the case, they bring forward witnesses, though false ones, to convict the one they accuse. When however the judge can in no way refute these witnesses for evident reasons, he is compelled by law to accept them. And having accepted their testimony, he must punish the innocent man who ought not to be punished.
Therefore he must punish, though the man has not deserved it, yet the judge performs this justly when the law commands it. From these cases therefore it is clear that sometimes punishment is reasonably imposed on one in whom no fault preceded. What therefore is surprising if where fault has preceded, the ensuing action increases punishment among men in this life, though not with God in the future?
For men judge not of hidden things but of manifest things, nor do they weigh so much the guilt of the fault as the effect of the work. But God alone, who attends not so much to what is done as with what spirit it is done, truly weighs guilt in our intention and examines fault with true judgment. Hence he is called the tester of heart and reins, as it says in the prophet Jeremiah, chapter twenty, verse twelve, and he sees in secret, as in Matthew's Gospel, chapter six, verse four. For there he sees especially where no one sees, because in punishing sin he does not attend to the work but to the soul, just as we conversely attend not to the soul, which we do not see, but to the work which we know.
Hence often through error, or through compulsion of law, as we said, we punish the innocent or absolve the guilty. God is called the tester and knower of heart and reins, that is, of whatever intentions proceeding from the affection of the soul, or from weakness, or from delight of the flesh.

Chapter Six: On Spiritual or Carnal Sins

For although all sins are of the soul only, not of the flesh (for guilt and contempt of God can exist there where knowledge of him and reason reside), yet some sins are called spiritual, some carnal, that is, some proceeding from vices of the soul, some from weakness of the flesh.
And although desire belongs to the soul alone, just as will does (for we cannot desire or want anything except by willing), yet desire of the flesh is spoken of, just as desire of the spirit is. For the Apostle says in his letter to the Galatians, chapter five, verse seven: 'The flesh desires against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh.' This means: from the delight which it has in the flesh, it desires certain things which nevertheless it flees by the judgment of reason, or judges ought to be desired.

Chapter Seven: Why God Is Said to Be the Inspector of Heart and Reins

According to therefore these two things, desire of the flesh and desire of the soul, which we set forth above, God is called tester of heart and reins, that is, inspector of intentions or consents proceeding from them. But we who are not able to examine and judge this, turn our judgment chiefly to works, and we punish not so much faults as works, nor do we strive to punish in anyone so much what harms his soul as what can harm others, so that we may rather prevent public harms than correct individual ones, according to what the Lord also says to Peter in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter eighteen, verse fifteen: 'If your brother sins against you, correct him between you and him alone.'
What does 'sins against you' mean, as if not against another, so that we should correct or punish injuries brought upon us rather than upon others? Far from it. 'If he sins against you,' he said, when he acts openly in a way that can corrupt you by example. For if he sins only against himself, when his hidden fault makes him alone guilty, he does not drag others to guilt as far as he is concerned through his example.
For even if there are lacking those who might imitate his evil action or even have known of it, yet the action itself rather than the fault of the soul should be chastised among men, because it could contract more offense and be done more perniciously through example than the hidden fault of the soul. For everything that can result in common harm or in public inconvenience should be punished with greater chastisement, and what contracts greater offense deserves heavier punishment among us, and greater scandal of men incurs greater punishment among men, even if a lighter fault preceded.
For let us suppose that someone has corrupted some woman by his intercourse in a church. When this has been reported to the ears of the people, they are moved not so much by the violation of the woman and of the true temple of God, as by the breaking of the physical temple, although it is more serious to presume upon a woman than upon walls, and to inflict injury upon a human being than upon a place. And we punish the burning of houses with greater penalty than completed fornication, although these latter are held far more serious before God than those former.
And these things indeed are done not so much by the requirement of justice as by the moderation of administration, so that, as we said, by preventing public harms we may provide for the common utility. Therefore we often punish the smallest sins with greater penalties, attending not so much to the equity of justice regarding what fault preceded, as thinking with the discretion of providence how much inconvenience might result from this if it is punished lightly.
Therefore, reserving faults of the soul to divine judgment, we pursue with our own judgment their effects, about which we have to judge, attending in such matters to administration, that is, to the reasoning of prudence which we mentioned, rather than to the purity of equity. But God arranges the punishment of each according to the quantity of fault, and whoever equally despise him are afterward punished with equal penalty, of whatever condition or profession they may be.
For if a monk and a layman equally come to consent to fornication, and the mind of the layman also is so inflamed that he himself, even if he were a monk, would not desist from this shameful act out of reverence for God, he deserves the same punishment as the monk. So also should we think about those of whom one, sinning openly, scandalizes many and corrupts them by example, while the other, sinning secretly, harms only himself.
For if one who sins secretly exists in the same purpose and equal contempt of God as that other, so that his not corrupting others happens more by chance than because he himself refrains for God's sake, who does not even restrain himself for God's sake, he is certainly bound by equal guilt before God. For God attends only to the soul in recompensing good or evil, not to the effects of works. He weighs not what proceeds from our fault or good will, but judges the soul itself in the purpose of its intention, not in the effect of outward work.
For works, which, as we said before, are equally common to the reprobate as to the elect, and all are in themselves indifferent, nor should they be called good or evil except according to the intention of the doer, not because it is good or evil that they be done, but because they are done well or badly, that is, with the intention by which they ought to be done, or not at all.
For, as blessed Augustine recalls, the very existence of evil is good, since God uses it well, nor does he permit it to exist otherwise, although the evil itself is by no means good. When therefore we say a man's intention is good and his work is good, we indeed distinguish two things, namely intention and work, yet only one goodness of intention. Just as if we say a good man and the son of a good man, we represent two men indeed, not two goodnesses.
Just as therefore a good man is called good from his own goodness, but when the son of a good man is named, it is shown from this that he has no goodness in himself, so the intention of anyone is called good in itself, but a work is not called good from itself, because it proceeds from good intention. Therefore there is one goodness, from which both intention and operation are called good, just as there is one goodness from which both a good man and the son of a good man are named, or one goodness from which both a good man and the good will of a man are called.
Those therefore who are accustomed to object that operation also is worthy of recompense of intention, or contributes to some increase of recompense, should note that their objection is trifling. They say: Two things are good, good intention and the effect of good intention, and good joined to good ought to be worth more than each singly.
To whom I respond that even if we suppose that whole to be worth more than the parts, are we therefore compelled to concede that it is worthy of greater recompense? Not at all. For there are many things, both animate and inanimate, whose multitude is useful for more things than any one thing included in that multitude, to all of which nevertheless no recompense at all is owed. Consider indeed that an ox joined to another ox or to a horse, or wood to wood, or to iron, these are indeed good things, and their multitude is worth more than each singly, yet it has absolutely nothing more of recompense.
Truly, you will say, it is so, because these are not things that can merit, since they lack reason. But does our work have reason so that it can merit? By no means, you will say. But yet a work is said to merit because it makes us merit, that is, worthy of recompense, or at least of greater recompense. But this we have certainly denied above, and hear why it should be denied apart from what we have said.
There are two men with the same purpose of building houses for the poor. One fulfills his devotion's desire, but the other, when the money which he had prepared is violently taken from him, is not permitted to complete what he proposed, with no fault of his own intervening, but only violence preventing him. Could what was done externally diminish his merit before God, or could another's malice make him less acceptable to God, who did as much as he could for God?
Otherwise the magnitude of money could make each person better and worthier, if indeed it could contribute to merit or to the increase of merit, and the richer men were, the better they could become, since they themselves from the abundance of riches could add more in works to their devotion. But to think this, namely that wealth can contribute anything to true blessedness or to the dignity of the soul, or take anything away from the merits of the poor, is the height of madness. But if the possession of things cannot make the soul better, certainly it cannot make it dearer to God, nor obtain anything in the blessedness of merit.

Chapter Eight: On the Recompense of External Works

Yet we do not deny that in this life something is given to these good or evil works, so that from present retribution in reward or punishment we may be more strongly incited to good things or drawn back from evil things, and from others may others take examples in doing what is fitting or avoiding what is not fitting.

Chapter Nine: That God and Man United in Christ Is Not Something Better Than God Alone

To return to what we said earlier, where we established that adding one good thing to another produces something better than either thing alone, be careful that you're not led to the conclusion that Christ—that is, God and man united to each other in one person—is somehow better than Christ's divinity or humanity itself. In other words, be careful not to say that God united to man, or man assumed by God, is something superior to God himself.
It's clear that in Christ, both the assumed man and the assuming God are good, and both substances can only be understood as good, just as in individual human beings both the bodily and incorporeal substances are good.
However, even though the goodness of the body contributes nothing to the dignity or merit of the soul, who would dare prefer the totality of what is called Christ—God and man together—or any collection of things whatsoever, to God alone, as if anything could be better than him who is the supreme good and from whom all things receive whatever goodness they possess?
Although certain things may seem so necessary for accomplishing something that God couldn't do it without them—as if they were supports or primary causes—nevertheless, no matter how great the magnitude of these things, nothing can be said to be better than God.
For even though the number of good things increases so that goodness exists in more things, it doesn't follow that the goodness becomes greater. Similarly, if knowledge abounds in more people, or the number of branches of knowledge increases, it's not necessary that anyone's knowledge grows or becomes greater than before.
In the same way, since God is good in himself and creates innumerable things that have neither being nor goodness except through him, goodness exists in more things through him so that the number of good things is greater, but no goodness can be preferred or equaled to his goodness.
Goodness exists in humans and goodness exists in God, and although the substances or natures in which goodness resides are different, nevertheless the goodness of no thing can be preferred or equaled to the divine. Therefore nothing should be called better—that is, a greater good—than God, or equally good.

Chapter Ten: Why Multiple Goods Don't Surpass a Single Good

In action and intention, there doesn't appear to be a number of goodnesses or good things. For when we speak of a good intention and a good action—that is, an action proceeding from good intention—only the goodness of the intention is being designated. The word 'good' isn't being used in the same sense, so that we could speak of multiple goods.
After all, when we say a person is simple and a statement is simple, we don't therefore admit that these are multiple simple things, since the word 'simple' is being used in one way here and another way there.
Therefore no one should force us, when a good action is added to a good intention, to concede that one good is being added to another as if there were multiple goods for which the reward should increase—since, as we've said, we can't rightly speak of multiple goods when the term 'good' doesn't apply to them in the same way.

Chapter Eleven: How Good Intention Makes an Action Good

We call an intention good—that is, right in itself—but we call an action good not because it receives something of goodness in itself, but because it proceeds from good intention.
That's why when the same person does the same thing at different times, the action is sometimes called good and sometimes bad depending on the diversity of his intention, and thus it seems to vary between good and evil.
It's similar to how this proposition—'Socrates is sitting'—or its meaning varies between true and false, depending on whether Socrates is sitting or standing. Aristotle says this change of variation between true and false happens in these cases not because the things that change with respect to truth or falsehood receive anything through their own change, but because the subject itself—that is, Socrates—moves in himself from sitting to standing or vice versa.

Chapter Twelve: What Makes an Intention Truly Good

There are some who think an intention is good or right whenever someone believes he's acting well and that what he's doing pleases God, just like those who persecuted the martyrs, about whom Truth says in the Gospel: 'The hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he is offering service to God.' That's from the Gospel of John, chapter sixteen, verse two.
The Apostle, sympathizing with their ignorance, says: 'I bear witness that they have zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.' That's from Paul's letter to the Romans, chapter ten, verse two. In other words, they have great fervor and desire in doing what they believe pleases God, but because they're deceived in this zeal or eagerness of their soul, their intention is mistaken. The eye of the heart isn't simple enough to see clearly—that is, to guard itself from error.
Therefore the Lord, when distinguishing works according to right or wrong intention, carefully called the eye of the mind—that is, the intention—either simple and as it were pure from filth so that it can see clearly, or conversely dark, when he said: 'If your eye is simple, your whole body will be full of light.' This means if your intention is right, the entire mass of works proceeding from it, which can be seen like bodily things, will be worthy of light—that is, good. And conversely the opposite.
Therefore an intention shouldn't be called good just because it seems good, but moreover because it actually is what it's believed to be—namely, when what it aims at, if it believes it pleases God, isn't mistaken in this belief.
Otherwise even unbelievers would have good works just like us, since they too believe no less than we do that they're saved through their works or that they please God.

Chapter Thirteen: Sin Exists Only Against Conscience

Yet if someone asks whether those persecutors of the martyrs or of Christ sinned in believing they were pleasing God, or whether they could have abandoned what they did without sin when they thought it should absolutely not be abandoned—well, according to what we described earlier as sin, namely contempt for God or consenting to what one believes should not be consented to, we can't say they sinned in this. Nor can we say that anyone's ignorance, or even unbelief itself, with which no one can be saved, is sin.
For those who don't know Christ and therefore reject the Christian faith because they believe it's contrary to God—what contempt of God do they have when they do this for God's sake and therefore think they're acting rightly, especially when the Apostle says: 'If our heart doesn't condemn us, we have confidence before God.' That's from John's first letter, chapter three, verse twenty-one. It's as if he's saying: when we don't presume against our conscience, we needlessly fear being held guilty of fault before God.
Or if the ignorance of such people shouldn't be attributed to sin at all, why does the Lord himself pray for those crucifying him, saying: 'Father, forgive them, for they don't know what they're doing'? That's from the Gospel of Luke, chapter twenty-three, verse thirty-four. And why does Stephen, instructed by this example, pray for those stoning him: 'Lord, don't hold this sin against them'? That's from the Acts of the Apostles, chapter seven, verse fifty-nine.
For there seems to be nothing to forgive where no guilt preceded, nor is the word 'forgive' usually used except to mean pardoning the punishment that guilt deserved. Moreover, Stephen openly calls it a sin, though it came from ignorance.

Chapter Fourteen: The Various Meanings of Sin

But to respond more fully to these objections, we should understand that the word 'sin' is used in various ways. Properly speaking, though, sin means contempt of God itself, or consent to evil, as we mentioned above. From this, small children and the naturally simple-minded are immune. Since they have no merit because they lack reason, nothing is imputed to them as sin, and they're saved only through the sacraments.
Sin is also called the sacrifice for sin, according to which the Apostle says the Lord Jesus Christ was made sin. The punishment of sin is also called sin or curse, in the sense that we say sin is forgiven—that is, punishment is pardoned—and that the Lord Jesus Christ bore our sins, meaning he sustained the punishment of our sins or what proceeded from them.
But when we say little children have original sin, or that we all sinned in Adam according to the Apostle, it's as if we're saying we incurred from his sin the origin of our punishment or the sentence of condemnation.
We also sometimes call the very works of sin, or whatever we don't rightly know or will, sins. For what does it mean to have committed a sin, except to have carried out the effect of sin?
This isn't surprising, since conversely we call sins themselves deeds, according to Athanasius who says: 'They will give account of their own deeds, and those who did good will go into eternal life, but those who did evil into eternal fire.'
For what does 'of their own deeds' mean? Is judgment to be made only on what they accomplished in action, so that whoever had more in action receives more in reward? Or is someone immune from damnation who lacked the outcome of what he intended, like the devil himself, who didn't obtain in outcome what he presumed in desire? Absolutely not!
Therefore when it speaks of their own deeds, it means their consent to what they decided to accomplish—that is, their sins, which before the Lord are counted as accomplished deeds, since he punishes them just as we do actions.
Now when Stephen speaks of the sin that the Jews were committing against him through ignorance, he called it sin meaning either the very punishment he was suffering from the sin of the first parents, along with the other punishments that proceed from it, or their unjust action in stoning him.
He was praying that this not be held against them—that is, that they not be bodily punished for it. For God often punishes some people bodily here, though no guilt of theirs demands it, yet not without cause. For instance, he sends afflictions even upon the just for their purification or testing, or permits some to be afflicted so that they may later be freed from this and God may be glorified through the benefit conferred, as happened with that blind man about whom he said: 'Neither this man sinned nor his parents, that he should be born blind, but that the works of God might be manifested in him.' That's from the Gospel of John, chapter nine, verse three.
Who would also deny that sometimes innocent children are endangered or afflicted along with evil parents because of their guilt, as happened in Sodom or as often happens in many peoples, so that the more widely punishment extends, the more evil people are terrified?
Carefully considering this, blessed Stephen prayed that the sin—that is, the punishment he was enduring from the Jews, or what they were doing incorrectly—not be held against them, meaning that they not be bodily punished for it.
The Lord held this same view when he said: 'Father, forgive them'—that is, don't avenge what they're doing to me, even with bodily punishment. This could reasonably happen even if no guilt of theirs had preceded, so that others seeing it, or they themselves, might recognize from the punishment that they hadn't acted rightly in this.
But it was fitting for the Lord to use this example of his own prayer to urge us especially toward the virtue of patience and the demonstration of supreme love, so that what he had taught us in words—namely, to pray even for enemies—he would show us in action through his own example.
Therefore when he said 'forgive,' he wasn't looking at preceding guilt or contempt of God that they might have had, but at the rationale for inflicting punishment, which could reasonably follow, as we said, even if no guilt had preceded—just as happened with the prophet who was sent to Samaria and ate in violation of what the Lord had forbidden. Yet since he presumed nothing through contempt of God but was deceived by another prophet, his innocence incurred death not so much from the charge of guilt as from the carrying out of the deed.
For God, as blessed Gregory remembers, sometimes changes his sentence but never his counsel. That is, what he decided to command or threaten for some reason, he often arranges not to fulfill. But his counsel remains fixed—that is, what he arranges in his foreknowledge to do never lacks effectiveness.
Therefore just as he didn't keep the command about sacrificing his son in Abraham's case, or the threat made against the Ninevites, and thus changed his sentence as we said, so the aforementioned prophet, to whom he had forbidden eating on the journey, believed his sentence was being changed and that he would be greatly at fault if he didn't listen to another prophet who claimed he was sent by the Lord to refresh his weariness with food.
Therefore he did this without guilt, having decided to avoid guilt in it, nor did sudden death harm him since it freed him from the hardships of the present life. It benefited many for their understanding of providence when they saw a just man punished without guilt, and saw fulfilled in him what is said elsewhere to the Lord: 'O God, since you are just, you arrange all things justly, even when you condemn one who should not be punished.' That's loosely from the book of Wisdom, chapter twelve, verse fifteen.
You condemn, he says, to death—not eternal but bodily. For just as some are saved without merits, like small children, and attain eternal life by grace alone, so it's not absurd that some endure bodily punishments they didn't deserve, just as is clear about little children who die without the grace of baptism, who are condemned to both bodily and eternal death, and many innocent people are also afflicted.
What then is surprising if those crucifying the Lord, from that unjust action, though ignorance excuses them from guilt, could not unreasonably incur temporal punishment as we said, and therefore it was said: 'forgive them'—that is, don't inflict the punishment they could not unreasonably incur from this, as we said?
Now just as what these people did through ignorance, or the ignorance itself, isn't properly called sin—that is, contempt of God—so neither is unbelief, even though it necessarily blocks access to eternal life for adults already using reason.
For damnation it's sufficient not to believe the Gospel, to be ignorant of Christ, not to receive the sacraments of the Church, even if this happens not so much through malice as through ignorance. About such people Truth also says: 'Whoever doesn't believe is already judged.' That's from the Gospel of John, chapter three, verse eighteen. And the Apostle says: 'And whoever is ignorant will be ignored.' That's from Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter fourteen, verse thirty-eight.
But when we say we sin ignorantly, we're using 'sin' to mean doing something that shouldn't be done, not in terms of contempt but in terms of action. For even philosophers say that saying or doing something inappropriately is sinning, even though it seems to have nothing to do with offending God.
Hence Aristotle, in his discussion of relations when speaking about the faulty assignment of relatives, says: 'But sometimes it won't seem to convert unless what it's said in relation to is appropriately assigned. For if the one making the assignment makes a mistake—for instance, if wing is assigned to bird—it doesn't convert, so that bird would be of wing.'
Therefore if we use the word 'sin' in this way for everything we do wrongly or have against our salvation, then certainly both unbelief and ignorance of what must be believed for salvation we'll call sins, even though no contempt of God appears there.
Yet I think sin is properly said to be what can never happen without guilt. But being ignorant of God, or not believing in him, or the very actions that are done incorrectly—these can happen to many without guilt.
For if someone doesn't believe in the Gospel or in Christ because the preaching hasn't reached him, according to the Apostle's words: 'How will they believe in him whom they haven't heard? But how will they hear without a preacher?' That's from Paul's letter to the Romans, chapter ten, verse fourteen.
What guilt from this can be assigned to him for not believing? Cornelius didn't believe in Christ until Peter was sent to him and instructed him about this. Although he previously recognized and loved God by natural law, for which he merited having his prayer heard and his alms accepted by God, nevertheless if he had departed from this life before faith in Christ, we wouldn't dare promise him life, however good his works appeared, nor would we count him among believers but rather among unbelievers, however occupied he was with concern for salvation.
For God's judgments are a deep abyss. Sometimes he draws those who resist or are less concerned about their salvation, and by the most profound counsel of his dispensation he rejects those who offer themselves or are more ready to believe.
For he rejected the one who offered himself, saying: 'Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.' That's from the Gospel of Matthew, chapter eight, verse nineteen. And another who excused himself through concern he had for his father, he didn't tolerate even for an hour in this excuse of piety.
Finally, reproaching the obstinacy of certain cities, he said: 'Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.' That's from the Gospel of Matthew, chapter eleven, verse twenty-one.
Look, he offered them not only his preaching but also the display of miracles, yet he already knew they wouldn't believe. But those other cities of the Gentiles, which he knew would be ready to receive the faith, he didn't consider worthy of his visitation at that time. In them, when some people perished though they were ready to receive him but the word of preaching was withheld from them—who would impute this to their guilt, when we see it happened through no negligence of theirs?
And yet we say their unbelief, in which they died, is sufficient for damnation, though the reason for this blindness in which the Lord left them is less apparent to us.
If someone attributes this to their sin without guilt, perhaps that will be permissible, since it seems absurd to him that such people should be damned without sin?
Yet we think that sin, properly speaking, as we've often mentioned, is only what consists in the guilt of negligence, and it can't exist in anyone of any age without their deserving to be damned because of it.
But I don't see how not believing in Christ—which is unbelief—should be attributed to guilt for small children or for those to whom it hasn't been announced, or for whatever happens through invincible ignorance that we couldn't foresee. For instance, if someone happens to kill with an arrow a person he doesn't see in the forest while intent on shooting wild beasts or birds.
Yet when we say such a person sins through ignorance, just as we sometimes admit that we sin not only in consent but also in thought, in this context we're not using the word properly to mean guilt but taking it broadly to mean what it's entirely unfitting for us to do, whether it happens through error or negligence or in any inappropriate way.
Therefore to sin through ignorance is like this: not to have guilt in it, but to do what isn't fitting for us. Or to sin in thought—that is, in will—to will what it's entirely unfitting for us to will. Or in speech or action, to speak or act in a way we shouldn't, even if it happens against our will through ignorance.
In this way we say that those who persecuted Christ or his followers, whom they believed should be persecuted, sinned through their action, yet they would have sinned more gravely in guilt if they had spared them against their conscience.

Chapter Fifteen: Whether All Sin Is Forbidden

The question is raised whether God forbids us every sin. If we accept this, he seems to be acting irrationally, since this life can't possibly be lived without at least venial sins.
For if he commanded us to avoid all sins, but we can't avoid them all, then he's certainly not imposing on us a sweet yoke or light burden as he promised, but one that far exceeds our strength and that we can't possibly bear, just as Peter the apostle declares about the yoke of the law.
For who can always guard himself from even an idle word, so as never to fail in holding that perfection about which James says: 'If anyone doesn't offend in word, he's a perfect man'? That's from the letter of James, chapter three, verse two. He also prefaced it by saying: 'We all offend in many things.' And another apostle of great perfection says: 'If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth isn't in us.' That's from John's first letter, chapter one, verse eight. I think everyone knows how difficult, indeed impossible, it seems for our weakness to remain entirely immune from sin.
So, I say, if we take the word 'sin' broadly as we said, and also call sins whatever we do inappropriately, then this is true. But if understanding sin properly we call only contempt of God sin, then this life can truly be lived without it, though with the greatest difficulty.
And certainly, as we mentioned above, what is forbidden us by God is nothing other than consent to evil, by which we despise God, even when the command seems to concern action, as we explained earlier, where we also showed that his commands can't be kept by us in any other way.
Now among sins, some are called venial and as it were light, others damnable or grave. Again, among damnable sins some are called criminal, which make the person infamous or criminal if they come to public hearing, while others don't.
Venial sins, or sins of this kind, occur when we consent to what we know shouldn't be consented to, but at that moment what we know doesn't come to mind. For we know many things even while sleeping, or when we don't remember them.
For we don't lose our knowledge by sleeping, or become foolish, nor do we become wise when we wake. Therefore sometimes we consent to idle talk or to excessive eating or drinking, though we know this absolutely shouldn't be done, but at the time we didn't at all remember that it shouldn't be done.
Therefore such acts of consent that we incur through forgetfulness are called venial or light sins—that is, not to be corrected by the punishment of great satisfaction, so that we'd be placed outside the church or pressed by severe abstinence on account of such things. For these negligences, to be forgiven to penitents, we practice the words of daily confession, in which mention of graver faults should absolutely not be made, but only of lighter ones.
For we shouldn't say there: I have sinned in perjury, in murder, in adultery, and similar things, which are called damnable and graver sins. For we don't incur these through forgetfulness like the others, but rather commit them as if from deliberation and intention, even becoming abominable to God according to the Psalmist's words: 'They have become abominable in their pursuits.' From Psalm fourteen, verse one. That is, execrable and very hateful because of what they knowingly presumed.
Among these, some are called criminal, which when known through their effect detract from a person with the stain of great guilt, such as consent to perjury, murder, or adultery, which greatly scandalize the Church.
But when we indulge in food more than necessary, or adorn ourselves with considerable finery from vainglory, even if we knowingly presume this, these things aren't attributed to crime and among many people have more praise than blame.

Chapter Sixteen: Whether Avoiding Light Sins Is Better Than Avoiding Grave Ones

There are those who say it's more perfect, and therefore better, to guard against venial sins than against criminal ones, because it seems more difficult and requires greater concern and effort.
To them I first respond with that saying of Cicero: 'Just because something is laborious doesn't make it glorious.' Otherwise those who bore the heavy yoke of the law would have greater merit before the Lord than those who serve in evangelical freedom, because fear involves punishment, which perfect love casts out, and whoever are driven by fear labor more in their work than those whom love makes willing.
Hence the Lord urges those laboring and burdened to take up the sweet yoke and light burden, so that they may pass from the servitude of the law, by which they were oppressed, to the freedom of the Gospel, and those who began from fear may be perfected by love, which without difficulty bears all things, endures all things. For nothing is difficult to one who loves, especially since spiritual love of God, not carnal, is stronger the truer it is.
Who doesn't know that it's more difficult for us to guard against a flea than an enemy, or against stumbling over a small stone than a large one? But do we therefore judge that avoiding what's more difficult is better or healthier? Certainly not. Why? Because what's more difficult to avoid can harm us less.
Therefore, even if we grant that it's more difficult to guard against venial sins than criminal ones, it's nevertheless more fitting to avoid those that are more dangerous, that deserve greater punishment, and by which we believe God is more offended and which displease him more.
For the more we cling to him through love, the more carefully we should avoid what offends him more and what he disapproves of more. For whoever truly loves someone strives not so much to avoid his own harm as to avoid offending his friend or showing contempt, according to the Apostle's words: 'Love doesn't seek its own interests.' That's from Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter thirteen, verse five. And again: 'Let no one seek his own good, but that of another.' That's from the same letter, chapter ten, verse twenty-four.
If therefore we should avoid sins not so much for our own harm as for offending God, certainly those sins should be more avoided in which he is more offended. And if we consider that poetic saying about moral virtue: 'The good hate to sin from love of virtue'—that's from Horace's Epistles, book one, epistle sixteen, line fifty-seven—then anything should be held in greater hatred the more base it's considered in itself, the more it departs from the honor of virtue, and the more it naturally offends anyone.
So then, to weigh individual sins more carefully by comparing them to one another, let's compare venial sins with mortal sins—for instance, overeating with perjury and adultery—and ask which transgression involves greater sin, or in which God is more thoroughly scorned and offended. I don't know—perhaps you'll answer that some philosophers have considered all sins equal. But if you want to follow this philosophy, or rather this obvious foolishness—that it's equally good to avoid both mortal and venial sins because committing either is equally bad—then why would anyone dare to prefer avoiding venial sins over avoiding mortal ones?
If someone asks how we can determine that God is more displeased by the transgression of adultery than by excessive eating, divine law can teach us, I believe. The law established no penal satisfaction for punishing the latter, but decreed that the former should be condemned not with just any penalty but with the affliction of capital punishment.
The more love of neighbor—which the Apostle calls the fullness of the law—is injured, the more one acts against it, and the greater the sin.
Now if, following this method, we want to compare individual venial and mortal sins with each other, and then also compare all venial sins taken together with all mortal sins, so that we can fully settle the matter—I don't shy away from this at all. So let's suppose someone is extremely careful to avoid all venial sins but doesn't bother to avoid mortal sins, and while avoiding all the former, presumes to commit the latter. Who will judge that this person sins less severely, or is better off, if by avoiding the venial sins he falls into the mortal ones?
Therefore, having made the comparison both of individual sins, as I said, and of all sins taken together, I believe it's clear that it is not better or more perfect to avoid venial sins than mortal ones.
However, if someone has first avoided mortal sins and then manages to avoid venial sins as well, as one ought, I admit that in this his virtue has reached perfection. Nevertheless, these latter achievements, in which the consummation of virtue consists, should not be preferred to the former, nor do they deserve equal reward.
Often in the construction of some building, those who complete it do less work than those who labored earlier, and those who put the final beam in place at the completion of the work bring it to perfection—so that the house becomes a finished house, which while incomplete was not yet a proper work at all.
I believe we've labored sufficiently up to this point for knowledge of sin, as much as memory allows, so that sin can be avoided all the better the more carefully it's been understood. After all, knowledge of evil cannot be lacking to the just person, nor can anyone avoid a vice unless it's known.

Chapter seventeen: On the reconciliation of sinners.

And since we've shown the wound of the soul, let's strive to show the remedy for its cure. Hence that saying of Jerome: O physician, if you are skilled, just as you have set out the cause of the disease, so indicate the cure!
Since then by sinning we offend God, what remains is to understand by what means we can be reconciled to him. There are therefore three things in the reconciliation of the sinner to God: repentance, confession, and satisfaction.

Chapter eighteen: What is properly called repentance?

Now repentance is properly defined as grief of soul over that in which one has transgressed—that is, when someone regrets having gone to excess in something, as in the book of Wisdom chapter five, verses two and three. But this repentance sometimes comes from love of God and is fruitful; at other times from some harm we don't want to suffer, like that repentance of the damned of whom Scripture says, as in the book of Wisdom, they will see and be troubled with terrible fear, and will marvel at the suddenness of unexpected salvation, saying within themselves and repenting and groaning through anguish of spirit: these are they whom we once held in derision, and so forth.
We also read of Judas's repentance over having betrayed the Lord, which we believe came not so much from guilt over his sin as from self-contempt, since he felt himself condemned in everyone's judgment.
For when someone has corrupted another with money or by some means and drawn him to destruction, the betrayer is held in lower regard by no one than by him, and no one trusts him less than the person who has most fully experienced his faithlessness.
Indeed, every day we see many who are about to depart this life repenting of the crimes they've committed and groaning with deep contrition—not so much from love of the God they've offended or hatred of the sin they've committed, but from fear of the punishment into which they're afraid they'll be cast.
These people remain wicked in this regard: that the wickedness of their fault displeases them less than the severity—which is just—of the punishment, nor do they hate what they've committed because it was evil as much as they hate God's just judgment, which they fear in the punishment, hating justice rather than injustice.
Those who have long been blinded and called to turn from their wickedness are at last handed over by divine justice to a reprobate mind, and struck with blindness are utterly cast from God's face, so that they have no knowledge of wholesome repentance and cannot perceive how satisfaction should be made.
We see very many dying people daily groaning heavily, accusing themselves greatly concerning usury, plunder, oppression of the poor, or whatever injuries they've committed, and consulting a priest for the amendment of these things.
If they're given this first counsel, as they ought to be—that having sold everything they possess, they should restore to others what they've taken, according to Augustine's saying: If someone else's property, which can be returned, is not returned, then repentance is not being performed but feigned—immediately their response reveals how empty their repentance is.
'How then,' they say, 'would my household live? What would I leave to my children, what to my wife? How could they support themselves?' To them comes first that rebuke from the Lord: Fool, this night they will demand your soul from you, and the things you have prepared—whose will they be? From the Gospel of Luke chapter twelve, verse twenty.
O wretched man, whoever you are—indeed most wretched of all the wretched, and most foolish of all the foolish—you're not considering what you're preserving for yourself, but what treasure you're storing up for others. With what presumption do you offend God, to whose terrible judgment you're being dragged, so that your family might be favorable to you, whom you enrich from the plunder of the poor?
Who won't laugh at you if they hear that you hope others will be more favorable to you than you are to yourself? You trust in the alms of your family—whom, because you believe you'll have them as successors, you make heirs of iniquity as well, leaving them others' property to possess through plunder.
You take away the life of the poor by removing their property by which they should be sustained, and in them you plot again to kill Christ, according to what he himself says: What you did to one of the least of mine, you did to me. From the Gospel of Matthew chapter twenty-five, verse forty.
What then do you, perversely devoted to your family and cruel to yourself and God alike, expect from the just Judge to whom, whether you wish it or not, you're hastening to be judged—he who demands an account not only of plunder but even of every idle word?
How strict he is in punishment was immediately shown by the penalty inflicted on the first people. Adam sinned once, and by comparison with our sins, as blessed Jerome reminds us, his sin was very light. He oppressed no one through violence nor took anything from anyone; he tasted once of fruit that could be replaced.
In this very light transgression, which overflowed through punishment even into all posterity, the Lord decided to demonstrate in advance what he would do concerning greater faults.
The rich man whom the Lord says descended to the underworld—not because he seized others' property, but because he didn't share his own, on which he feasted as if lawfully, with needy Lazarus—clearly teaches what punishment must strike those who seize others' property, if he was thus condemned and buried in hell who did not give his own goods.
With the memory of you buried with you, and the tears of those who attended your funeral quickly dried—according to the rhetorician Apollonius: nothing dries faster than a tear—your wife has soon prepared herself for a new marriage, to serve the pleasures of a new husband with the plunder you left her, and while your body is still present she'll warm another man's bed, while you, wretched one, will pay for those pleasures in the flames of Gehenna. The same is to be expected from your children.
Now if someone should perhaps ask why they don't remember you and propitiate you with their alms, they seem able to excuse themselves for many reasons.
For they might respond: Since he refused to be favorable to himself, what foolishness it was for him to hope others would be favorable to him, and to entrust the salvation of his soul to others, for which he himself should have provided most abundantly. Whom did he believe would be more favorable to him than himself? He who was cruel to himself—in whose mercy was he placing his confidence?
Finally, they can even put forward in excuse of their own greed: We know moreover that what he left us is not of such a nature that alms should be given from it by us. Everyone will laugh, and ought to laugh, who hears these things.
But that wretched man who forced despoiled paupers to weep for an hour will weep there forever.
There are those who, wanting to hide their negligence from men but not from God, resort to excusing their excuses in their sins and say that those they've despoiled are so many that they cannot possibly know or find them at all. Because they assume no concern about this, they fall under that judgment of the Apostle's sentence: And whoever is ignorant will be ignored. From Paul's first letter to the Corinthians chapter fourteen, verse thirty-eight.
They don't find them because they don't seek them. The right hand of God, whom they despised, will find them. Concerning which it is also written: Your right hand will find all who hate you. From Psalm twenty, verse nine.
The same prophet who said this, trembling greatly and considering no place of escape, says elsewhere: Where shall I go from your spirit, and where shall I flee from your face? If I ascend into heaven, you are there; if I descend into hell, you are present. From Psalm one hundred thirty-eight, verse five.
And because often the avarice of the priest is no less than that of the people, according to that saying of the prophet: And it shall be like priest, like people, from Hosea chapter four, verse nine—the greed of priests promising them vain security will seduce many dying people, if they offer what they have for sacrifices and buy masses, which they would by no means have for free.
In this trade a fixed price is established among them: one denarius for one mass, and forty for one annual cycle. They don't advise the dying to restore their plunder, but to offer it in sacrifice. Yet Scripture says the contrary: Whoever offers sacrifice from the substance of the poor is like one who slaughters a son in his father's presence. From Ecclesiasticus chapter thirty-four, verse twenty-four. For the killing of a son done before the father burdens him more than if he didn't see it. And the son is as it were killed by immolation when the substance of the poor, in which his life consisted, is placed in sacrifice.
And Truth, preferring mercy to sacrifice, says: Go and learn what this means: I desire mercy and not sacrifice. From the Gospel of Matthew chapter nine, verse thirteen. But it's worse to retain plunder than not to show mercy—that is, to take away from the poor what is theirs rather than not to give what is ours, as we mentioned above in the condemnation of the rich man.

Chapter nineteen: On fruitful repentance.

And since we've spoken of fruitless repentance, let's consider fruitful repentance all the more diligently because it's more wholesome. The Apostle, inviting anyone who is obstinate and not paying attention to God's terrible judgment, says: Or do you despise the riches of his goodness and patience and forbearance? Are you ignorant that God's kindness is leading you to repentance? From Paul's letter to the Romans chapter two, verse four.
By these words he clearly declares what wholesome repentance is, and that it comes from love of God rather than from fear—namely, that we should grieve for having offended or despised God because he is good, rather than because he is just.
The longer we despise him—because we don't believe he immediately judges the contempt shown to him, unlike earthly princes who, when offended, don't know how to spare or delay revenge for their injuries—the more justly he inflicts a heavier punishment for contempt of himself. And he is all the more severe in vengeance the more patient he was in waiting.
The same Apostle shows this subsequently when he says: But according to your hardness and impenitent heart, you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath. From the same chapter, verse five. Then indeed wrath, now gentleness; then vengeance, now patience.
There, as justice demands, he will avenge contempt of himself all the more severely the less he deserved to be despised and the longer he endured it.
We fear offending people, and whose offense we don't escape by fear, we avoid through shame. We seek hiding places when we fornicate, lest we be seen by people, nor can we then bear the sight of even one person. We know God is present, from whom nothing can be hidden. Yet we're not ashamed to be seen by him and the whole court of heaven in this shameful act, though we'd be confounded at the sight of one insignificant person.
Before an earthly judge we're especially afraid to presume anything, knowing we'll be judged by him with only temporal punishment, not eternal. Carnal affection compels us to do or endure many things, spiritual affection few. Would that we did or endured as much for God, to whom we owe everything, as we do or endure for a wife or children or any prostitute!
By what punishment, I ask, should this injury be judged—that we even prefer a prostitute to him? He himself complains through the prophet that neither love is shown to him as Father nor fear as Lord: A son honors his father, and a servant fears his lord; if I am Father, where is my honor? And if I am Lord, where is my fear? From Malachi chapter one, verse six.
He complains that a father or lord is preferred to him. Consider therefore how indignant he must be that even a prostitute is preferred to him, and that because of the supreme patience of his goodness, for which he should be more loved, he is more despised.
Those who repent wholesomely, considering indeed this goodness and the forbearance of his patience, are moved to compunction not so much by fear of punishments as by love of him, according to the aforementioned exhortation of the Apostle where he carefully described wholesome repentance when he said conversely: Or do you despise the riches of his goodness—that is, the rich and abundant goodness, or the overflowing kindness of longsuffering patience by which he has tolerated you for so long—because he doesn't punish quickly? Are you ignorant—that is, not paying attention—that his kindness, as far as it concerns him, leads you to repentance? That is, it creates the reason why, by paying attention to it, you should turn to repentance: that you have despised one so kind.
And this indeed is truly fruitful repentance for sin, when this grief and contrition of soul proceeds from love of God, whom we recognize as so kind, rather than from fear of punishments.
Now with this groaning and contrition of heart, which we call true repentance, sin does not remain—that is, contempt of God or consent to evil—because the love of God that inspires this groaning does not tolerate guilt.
In this groaning we are immediately reconciled to God and obtain pardon for our previous sin, according to that saying of the prophet: At whatever hour the sinner groans, he will be saved. From Ezekiel chapter thirty-three, verse fourteen. That is, he will be made worthy of the salvation of his soul.
He doesn't say: in what year, or in what month, or in what week, or on what day, but at what hour—to show that one is worthy of pardon without delay, and that eternal punishment, in which the condemnation of sin consists, is not owed to him.
For even if overtaken by the moment of necessity he doesn't have opportunity to come to confession or to perform satisfaction, by no means does he who departs this life in this groaning fall into Gehenna. For sin to be forgiven by God means this: that he becomes such that it's no longer fitting for his soul to be eternally punished by God on account of the sin that preceded.
For when God forgives sin to the penitent, he doesn't remit all punishment to them, but only the eternal. Indeed, many penitent people who, overtaken by death, didn't perform the satisfaction of penance in this life, are reserved for purifying punishments in the future life, not damning ones.
Hence the supreme day of judgment, on which suddenly many of the faithful must be punished, extends over an uncertain span of time, although the resurrection happens in a moment, in the blink of an eye, as in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians chapter fifteen, verse fifty-two—so that there they may make satisfaction for their faults as much as God has decreed, for which they either delayed making satisfaction or were not permitted to do so.

Chapter twenty: Whether one can repent of one sin without repenting of another.

Some ask whether one can repent of one sin and not of another—for instance, of murder but not of fornication, which one doesn't yet cease to commit.
But if we understand that fruitful repentance which love of God instills, and which Gregory describing says: Repentance is to weep for what has been committed and not to commit what should be wept for—by no means can it be called repentance, to which love of God compels us, whenever one contempt is retained.
For if love of God, as it should, leads me to this and draws my mind so that I grieve over this consent solely because in it I offended God, I don't see how the same love doesn't compel me to repent of that contempt for the same reason—that is, establish my mind in such a purpose that whatever transgression of mine comes to memory, I similarly grieve over it and am prepared to make satisfaction.
Therefore wherever there is true repentance—that is, coming from love of God alone—no contempt of God remains, especially since Truth says: If anyone loves me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him. From the Gospel of John chapter fourteen, verse twenty-three.
Therefore whoever persists in love of God must necessarily be saved—which salvation would by no means occur with one sin, that is, one contempt of God, retained.
But when God finds no sin remaining in the penitent, he finds there no cause of condemnation. And therefore it's necessary that, with sin ceasing, condemnation does not remain—that is, the affliction of perpetual punishment. And this means that the sin that preceded is forgiven by God from the eternal punishment which it had merited, as we said, being provided for by God.
For although God no longer finds in the penitent what he should punish perpetually, he is nevertheless said to forgive the punishment of the preceding sin when by inspiring in him the groaning of repentance, he has made him worthy of indulgence—that is, such a person to whom no eternal punishment is then owed, and who, departing this life in this state, must necessarily be saved.
But if perhaps he falls back into the same contempt, just as he returns to sin, so also he relapses into the obligation of punishment, so that he who by repenting had merited not to be punished must again be punished.
If someone should perhaps say that for sin to be forgiven by God means that God will by no means damn a person on account of what was committed, or that God has determined within himself not to damn him on account of this—then indeed even before the penitent sinned, God seems to have forgiven that sin, that is, determined within himself that he would not damn him on account of it. For God doesn't recently determine or arrange anything within himself, but from eternity whatever he's going to do exists in his predestination and is fixed in his providence, both concerning the forgiveness of any sin and concerning other things that happen.
Therefore it seems better to us that we should understand God forgiving sin thus: that he makes anyone, as we said, worthy of indulgence through the groaning of repentance inspired in him—that is, such a person to whom damnation is not then owed, nor ever afterwards, if he perseveres in such a purpose.
Therefore God forgives sin when he himself, from whom punishment should come, brings it about, by inspiring repentance, that it should no longer be inflicted.

Chapter twenty-one: That it's not unjust for a reward not to be given to one worthy of it.

But perhaps you ask: if one who repents is now worthy of eternal life, since he's not worthy of damnation? If we grant this, it's objected to us that even one who, having lapsed after repentance, perished, was worthy of eternal life while he was repenting. And it seems God should be accused of injustice because he didn't at least then give him the reward of which he was then worthy, so as to prevent his damnation.
For just as if he had died then, from that purpose in which he then was, he would be saved as worthy of eternal life, so also if he later fell, from the same disposition he previously had, he was worthy to be saved.
But I say that just as many are often worthy of damnation, yet don't die in their wickedness so that the damnation they merited be rendered to them by God—nor is God therefore to be accused of injustice because he didn't render to them the punishment they merited—so neither in rendering rewards, which are promised only to those who persevere, as Truth attests: Whoever perseveres to the end will be saved. From the Gospel of Matthew chapter ten, verse twenty-two.
Therefore we're not forced to concede that because someone was at some time worthy of punishment or reward, it's therefore fitting or just for God to confer it on him, since God has foreseen that it's better to use him another way, because he uses even evil things well and arranges the worst things in the best way.
But if perhaps someone says that one who, loving God for a time, truly repented but nevertheless didn't persevere in this repentance or love, was not therefore worthy of the reward of life—certainly since it's granted that he wasn't then worthy of damnation either, he will seem to have been then neither just nor a sinner.

Chapter twenty-two: On the unforgivable sin.

But since, as we said, every sin immediately receives forgiveness through repentance, it's asked why Truth said that a certain sin is unforgivable, or would never have forgiveness, that is, pardon. Such is that sin of blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, about which Matthew reports him saying: Every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven. From the Gospel of Luke chapter twelve, verse thirty-one. And: Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him either in this age or in the future. From the same Gospel, chapter twelve, verse ten.
Mark explained why he said this when he wrote: Because they said, He has an unclean spirit. From the Gospel of Mark chapter three, verse thirty.
Now some say this sin is despair of pardon, when someone on account of the magnitude of sins utterly loses confidence in the goodness of God, which is understood through the Holy Spirit, so that he cannot obtain pardon either by repenting or by any satisfaction.
But if we say this is to sin or blaspheme against the Spirit, what shall we say it is to sin against the Son of Man?
As it seems to me, to sin or blaspheme against the Son of Man in this context means to detract from the excellence of Christ's humanity, as if denying that it was conceived without sin or assumed by God, on account of the visible weakness of the flesh. This indeed could not be grasped by any human reasoning, but only believed through God's revelation.
Therefore what he says is this: Every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven—as if he were saying: Concerning no other blasphemy has it been determined by God that it will be forgiven to no men, except this one. And whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him—that is, no one who detracts from the dignity of the assumed man, as we said, will be damned on this account, if other causes of damnation don't intervene.
For in this no one can be marked with contempt of God if he contradicts the truth through error and doesn't act against his conscience, especially when this is something that cannot be investigated by human reason but rather seems contrary to reason.
But to blaspheme against the Spirit is to slander the works of God's manifest grace in such a way that those things which they believed were done mercifully through the Holy Spirit, that is, by divine goodness, they nevertheless asserted were accomplished through the devil—as if saying that he whom they believed to be the Spirit of God was an evil spirit, and thus that God was the devil.
Therefore whoever thus sinned against Christ by saying against their conscience that he cast out demons by Beelzebub the prince of demons, are so utterly banished from the kingdom of God and completely excluded from his grace that none of them would henceforth merit indulgence through repentance.
Nor indeed do we deny that they could be saved if they repented, but we only say that they won't even attain the actions of repentance.

Chapter twenty-three: Whether penitents carry the groaning of their grief with them from here.

Perhaps someone asks whether those who depart this life as penitents in this groaning of heart and contrition of grief—where a true sacrifice is offered to God according to that verse: A sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit, from Psalm fifty—whether, I say, such people migrating from this light carry this groaning and grief with them, so that in that heavenly life too they grieve over having committed these things, to which place, as Scripture says, pain and groaning flee away, from Isaiah chapter thirty-five, verse ten, and sadness.
But certainly just as our sins displease God and the angels without any pain of grief—namely because they don't approve what they consider evil—so also then those things in which we transgressed will displease us.
But whether we would wish to have done those things which we know were well-ordered by God and also worked together for our good, according to that saying of the Apostle: We know that for those who love God all things work together for good, from Paul's letter to the Romans chapter eight, verse twenty-eight—this is another question which we resolved according to our ability in the third book of our Theology.

Chapter twenty-four: On confession.

N ow we must address the conf ession of sins. The Ap ost le James ex h orts us to this when he says: Con fess your sins to one another, and pray for one another, that you may be saved. For the constant prayer of a right eous person has great power. That' s from the let ter of James, chapter five, verse six teen. There are some who think we should conf ess only to God, and they attribute this position to certain Greek Christ ians.
B ut I don' t see what power conf ession has before God, who knows all things. What forg iven ess does our tongue obtain? Even though the Psalmist says: I made my trans gress ion known to you, and I did not hide my un right eous ness. From the Book of Psalms, chapter thirty- one, verse five. The faith ful conf ess their sins to one another for many reasons, according to the Ap ost le' s statement we just quoted. First, for the stated reason: that we may be helped more by the prayers of those to whom we conf ess. Also because a great part of satisfaction takes place in the h umility of conf ession, and through the reducing of pen ance we ob tain greater forg iven ess. Just as it is written about David: when he was acc used by the prophet Nathan and responded, I have sinned, that' s from the Second Book of Samuel, chapter twelve, verse thirteen, immediately he heard the answer from that same prophet: The Lord also has taken away your sin. For the greater the king' s sub lim ity, the more accept able to God was his trust ing h umility.
Con seq u ently, pri ests, to whom the souls of the conf ess ing are comm itted, must imp ose satisf actions of pen ance. For those who mis used their own j udgment arro gantly by desp ising God must be correct ed by the j udgment of another' s authority. And they do this more sec ure ly when, by ob ey ing their super iors, they follow not so much their own will as the will of those super iors. If the super iors happen to command incorrect ly, since the person is prepared to ob ey, this should be imp uted more to the super iors than to them. As the Ap ost le says, we are not ign or ant of Satan' s str ategies. That' s from Paul' s second let ter to the Cor inth ians, chapter two, verse eleven. His wicked ness must not be pass ed over at this point, for through it he dr ives us to sin and with draws us from conf ession.
W hen inc iting us to sin, Satan str ips us of both fear and shame, so that nothing remains to call us back from sin. We don' t dare commit many things for fear of p un ishment. We are ash amed to under take many things because of dam age to our reputation, even if we could do so with imp un ity. There fore, once anyone is freed from these two rest ra ints, he becomes head long in per pe trat ing any sin what so ever. In this way, Satan gives back what he previously took away to bring the sin to completion, so that he can with draw the person from conf ession. Then one fears or is ash amed to conf ess what, when it should have been done first, he neither feared nor was ash amed of. He fears that through conf ession he may become known and be p un ished by human beings, though he did not fear being p un ished by God. He is ash amed that human beings should know what he was not ash amed to commit before God.
B ut whoever se eks the rem edy for a wound must reveal it to the phys ician, however fil thy it may be, however much it may stink, so that proper treatment may be app lied. The pri est holds the place of the phys ician, and as we said, satisfaction must be establish ed by him.
Ch ap ter twenty- five: Whether conf ession may sometimes be om itted.
Y et we must recognize that conf ession can sometimes be a vo id ed by health ful disp ens ation, as we believe happened with Peter. We know about his te ars after his den ial, but we do not read about any other satisfaction or conf ession. Am brose, in his comment ary on the Gosp el of Luke, discusses this very den ial and we eping of Peter, saying: I do not find what he said, I find that he we pt. I read of his te ars, I do not read of his satisfaction. Te ars lift up the wrong do ing that shame prevents the voice from conf ess ing. We eping serves both forg iven ess and mod esty. Te ars speak gu ilt without embar rass ment and conf ess without offend ing mod esty. Te ars do not demand forg iven ess but deserve it. I understand why Peter was silent, so that such a quick request for forg iven ess might not cause greater off ense.
W e must examine what kind of mod esty or rev er ence regarding conf ession led Peter to make satisfaction more through we eping than through conf ess ing. If he was ash amed to conf ess only for this reason, that he might be regarded as more worth less once his sin was known, then he was surely proud, cons ult ing the glory of his hon or more than the sal vation of his soul. But if he was rest rained by concern not so much for his own mod esty as for the Church, this should not be dis appr oved.
P erh aps he fore saw that he would be establish ed by the Lord as leader over the Lord' s people, and he feared that if this tr iple den ial of his were qu ickly made public through his conf ession, the Church would be grav ely sc and al ized. The Church would be conf ounded with intense embar rass ment that the Lord had placed over it someone so eas ily moved to den ial, so we ak- minded. There fore, if he post pon ed conf ess ing both to pres erve his hon or and because of this embar rass ment for the Church, he did this prud ently, not proud ly. His fear was also re ason able, concern ing more the harm to the Church than the dam age to his own reputation.
H e knew that the Church had been spec if ically comm itted to him by the Lord when the Lord said to him: And you, when you have turned back, str eng then your bro thers. That' s from the Gosp el of Luke, chapter twenty- two, verse thirty- two. There fore, if this horrible fall of his had reached the e ars of the Church while he was still conv icted by his own conf ession, who would not re ad ily say: We do not want this man to re ign over us? That' s from the Gosp el of Luke, chapter nine teen, verse four teen. And who would not e as ily dis appr ove of the Lord' s j udgment for choosing to str eng then the bro thers the one who failed first?
B y this same prud ence, many could post pone conf ession, or om it it ent ire ly, without sin, if they believed it would cause more harm than good. For we inc ur no off ense against God from a fault in which we in no way desp ise him. Peter post pon ed conf ess ing his sin while the Church was still tend er in faith and we ak, until Peter' s power was proved by his own pre ach ing or by mir acles. But after ward, when this had been establish ed, Peter himself was able to conf ess this without any sc and al to the Church, as a counter to the desp air of those who had fallen. Thus it was also left written by the ev angel ists.
P erh aps it se ems to some that Peter, who was set over all the others and had no super ior to whom his soul was comm itted, had no nec ess ity at all to conf ess his sin to a human being, as if satisfaction had to be establish ed for him by someone, or as if he were ob ey ing the command of a super ior. But if he was not ob lig ed to conf ess to anyone for the imp os ition of satisfaction, it could app rop ri ately be done for the purpose of prayer ful support. For when Scripture says: Con fess your sins to one another, it immediately adds: and pray for one another, that you may be saved. That' s from the let ter of James, chapter five, verse six teen.
N oth ing also prevents super iors from cho os ing sub jects to make conf ession or to under take satisfaction, so that what is done may become more accept able to God to the extent that it is done more h umb ly by him. Who also for b ids anyone in such matters to cho ose a more relig ious or more disc ern ing person, to whose j udgment he may ent rust his satisfaction and by whose prayers he may be greatly help ed? Therefore, when it says, and pray for one another that you may be saved, it immediately adds: for the constant prayer of a right eous person has great power.
J ust as many become un sk illed phys ic ians, to whom it is danger ous or use less to comm it the sick, so also among the super iors of the Church many are found who are neither relig ious nor disc ern ing. More over, they are car eless about reve aling the sins of those conf ess ing, so that conf ess ing to them se ems not only use less but even harm ful.
S uch people neither int end to pray, nor do they deserve to be he ard in their prayers. And since they are ign or ant of the establish ed can ons, they do not know how to exercise mod er ation in establish ing satisf actions. Fre qu ently in such matters they prom ise va in sec urity and dece ive the very ones conf ess ing with emp ty hope, according to the words of Tr uth: They are blind gu ides of the blind. And again: If a blind person gives gu id ance to a blind person, both will fall into a pit. That' s from the Gosp el of Matthew, chapter fif teen, verse four teen.
W hen they also, as we said, c are less ly reve al the conf ess ions they receive, they pro voke the pen it ent to ind ign ation. Those who should have cur ed sins inf lict new wounds of sin and det er others who he ar them from conf ession.
S omet imes also, by reve aling sins out of anger or care less ness, they grav ely sc and al ize the Church and place those who have conf ess ed in great danger. Therefore, those who have decided to a vo id their super iors because of these inconv en iences, and to cho ose others in such matters whom they believe more suit able for these things, should in no way be dis appr oved. R ather, they should be appr oved because they turn to a more skill ful phys ician. How ever, in doing this, if they can ob tain the cons ent of their super iors so that they are directed by them to others, they do it all the more app rop ri ately in as much as they do this more h umb ly through ob ed ience.
B ut if the proud super iors for b id this, as if est eem ing themselves as more worth less if better phys ic ians are so ught, never the less the sick person, concern ed about his sal vation, should se ek with great er sol ic itude the rem edy he believes is better, and should very much y ield to better counsel. For no one should follow into a pit a gu ide who has been ass ign ed to him by someone else, if he disc overs that he is blind. It is better to cho ose a gu ide who can see, so that he may reach where he is head ed, than to follow bad ly one who was bad ly ass ign ed to him, leading to a prec ip ice.
S ure ly whoever hand ed over such a gu ide to him, as if to show the way, did this either know ing ly through mal ice, or inn oc ently through ign or ance. If through mal ice, one had to be care ful that his mal ice not be fulf illed. If through ign or ance, one does not act against his will at all if we do not follow to danger the one he had given us as a gu ide. How ever, it is use ful that we first cons ult those to whom we know our souls are comm itted, and having he ard their counsel, not ab and on the health ier rem edy, if we hope for it, espec ially when we believe they are ign or ant of the law and not only do not care what they do, but are ign or ant of what they suffer. They should be regard ed as worse than those about whom Tr uth says: The scri bes and the Ph ar ise es sit on Mo ses' se at. There fore, ob serve and do whatever they tell you. But do not do according to their works. That' s from the Gosp el of Matthew, chapter twenty- three, verse two.
A s if to say: such people hold the teach ing office of the law, whose works, since they are evil and therefore must be reject ed, but the words of God that they bring forth from Mo ses' se at, that is from the teach ing office of the law, must be rece ived. So that at the same time we may reject their works, which are their own, and ret ain the words, which are God' s.
T here fore, the teaching of such people should not be desp ised who pre ach well, although they live bad ly, and who inst ruct with words, although they do not ed ify by example. They show the way that they are un will ing to follow, to be j udged not so much by the bl ind ness of ign or ance as by the gu ilt of neg lig ence. But those who cannot show the way to their sub jects, those who should comm it themselves to their gu id ance should seek inst ruction from those who do not know how to teach. Y et sub jects should not desp air of God' s mer cy when, completely prepared for satisfaction, they hand themselves over to the j udgment of their super iors, however blind, and what those super iors establish too little through error, these sub jects d il ig ently follow through ob ed ience. For the error of super iors does not d amn sub jects, nor does the vice of those super iors acc use these sub jects. N or does gu ilt remain in sub jects by which they might die, whom pen ance had already rec onc iled to God, as we said, before they came to conf ession or under took the establish ment of satisfaction.
H ow ever, if something of the p un ishment of satisfaction is establish ed less than it should be, God, who rem its no sin un p un ished and p un ishes each thing as much as it deserves, will pres erve the equ ity of satisfaction accord ing to the qu ant ity of sin. N amely, he will not res erve those pen it ents for et ernal p un ishments, but will aff lict them either in this life or in the next by p urg at orial p un ishments, if we are neg lig ent in our satisfaction. Therefore the Ap ost le says: If we j udged ourselves, we would certainly not be j udged. That' s from Paul' s first let ter to the Cor inth ians, chapter eleven, verse thirty- one. Which is to say: If we ourselves p un ished or correct ed our sins, they would in no way need to be p un ished more grav ely by him. It is tru ly a great mer cy of God when he leaves us to our own j udgment, so that he does not p un ish more grav ely.
M ore over, we call satisfaction these p un ishments of the present life by which we make satisfaction for sins, by fast ing, or pray ing, or keep ing vig il, or by mac er ating the flesh in whatever ways, or by giving to the ne edy what we with draw from ourselves. We know these are called by another name in the Gosp el, fru its of pen ance, where it says: B ear fru its worth y of pen ance. That' s from the Gosp el of Matthew, chapter three, verse eight. As if it were said open ly: by amend ing with worth y satisfaction what you have wrong ed, be thus rec onc iled to God here, so that he may find nothing more to p un ish here after. Pre vent more grav e p un ishments with mild er ones. For as the ble ssed August ine ass erts: The p un ishments of the future life, even if they are p urg at orial, are more grav e than all these of the present life.
T here fore, great care must be app lied to them, and great effort given, so that according to the establish ed rules of the holy F athers, such satisfaction may be under taken that nothing remains there to be p urg ed. W hen there fore pri ests are ind iscr imin ate, who are ign or ant of these establish ed can ons, so that they imp ose less satisfaction than is app rop ri ate, the pen it ents inc ur great inconv en ience from this. Trust ing bad ly in them, they are after ward p un ished with more grav e p un ishments for which they could have made satisfaction here through mild er ones.
T here are some pri ests who dece ive their sub jects not so much through error as through gre ed, so that in return for offer ings of mon ey they rem it or relax the p un ishments of imp osed satisfaction. They are att ending not so much to what the Lord wants as to what the mon ey is worth. Concern ing them, the Lord himself compl ains through the prophet, saying: My pri ests did not say: Where is the Lord? That' s from the prophet Jer em iah, chapter two, verse six. As if to say: But where is the mon ey?
N or only pri ests, but we know that even the chief pri ests themselves, that is the bis hops, bur n so sh ame less ly with this gre ed. W hen they have popular gather ings in ded ic ations of ch urches, or in cons ecr ations of alt ars, or bless ings of cem et eries, or in certain sol emn ities, from which they expe ct ab und ant offer ings, they are wa ste ful in rel ax ing pen ances. Sometimes they grant commonly to everyone a third, sometimes a fourth part of pen ance, under a certain appearance of char ity, but in reality of ex treme gre ed.
T hey bo ast about their power, which, as they say, they rece ived in Peter or in the ap ost les, when the Lord said to them: Wh ose ver sins you rem it, they are rem itted to them; or, whatever you lo ose on earth will be lo osed also in he aven. That' s from the Gosp el of John, chapter twenty, verse twenty- three. Then they glory most in doing what is their own when they best ow this ben ev ol ence on their sub jects. And would that they at least did it for the people themselves, not for mon ey, so that it might seem to be some kind of ben ev ol ence rather than gre ed. But certainly if this is to be held in pra ise of ben ev ol ence, that they relax a third or fourth part of pen ance, their p iety would be much more pra ised if they rem itted half or even the whole pen ance ent ire ly, as they prof ess is law ful for them and grant ed by the Lord, and as if the he av ens were placed in their hands according to the test im on ies quoted above regarding the rem ission or abs ol ution of sins.
F urther more, on the contrary, they seem to be acc us able of great imp iety for not abs olv ing all their sub jects from all sins, so that they would perm it none of them to be d amned. If, I say, it is thus establish ed in their power, that they may rem it or ret ain whatever sins they wish, or open or close the he av ens to wh om ever they have dec reed. They would certainly be proc la imed most ble ssed if they could open these for themselves when ever they wish ed. But if they truly cannot or do not know how to do this, they certainly fall into that poet ic line, as I judge:
N or do the sk ills that ben ef it everyone ben ef it the master.
L et anyone else des ire, but not I, that power by which one can ben ef it others rather than one self, as if in one' s power one had to save the souls of others more than one' s own. Every disc ern ing person thinks the opposite.
Ch ap ter twenty- six: Whether the power to lo ose and b ind extends gener ally to all super iors.
W hen it is asked, there fore, what is that power, or the keys of the king dom of he aven, which the Lord hand ed over to the ap ost les and similarly is read to have grant ed to their vic ars, n amely the bis hops, it se ems no small question. For since there are many bis hops who have neither hol iness nor disc ern ment, although they have ep isc op al power, how shall we say that there app lies to them equal ly as to the ap ost les: Wh ose ver sins you rem it, they are rem itted to them, and wh ose ver you ret ain, they are ret ained?
S ure ly if a bis hop wish es ind iscr imin ate ly or ex cess ively to incre ase or relax the p un ishment of sin, is this in his power? N amely, that God should arr ange p un ishments according to his j udgment, so that he p un ishes more what should be p un ished less, and convers ely, when God should att end to the equ ity of the thing more than the will of human beings? S ure ly if a bis hop has dec reed, out of anger or the h atr ed he holds against someone, that he should do pen ance equal ly for light er sins as for more grav e ones, or has decided to ext end his p un ishment perpet u ally, or never to relax it for him no matter how much he does pen ance, will the Lord confirm this sent ence of his?
T here fore, what the Lord says to the ap ost les: Wh ose ver sins you rem it, they are rem itted to them, and so forth, seems to refer to their persons, not gener ally to all bis hops. Just as what he says to them else where: You are the light of the world, and you are the salt of the earth, that' s from the Gosp el of Matthew, chapter five, verse eight een, or very many other things are to be under stood spec if ically about their persons. For the Lord did not grant equal ly to their success ors this disc ern ment or hol iness that he gave to the ap ost les. N or did he say equal ly to everyone: Ble ssed are the e yes that see what you see. That' s from the Gosp el of Luke, chapter ten, verse twenty- three. And again: But I have called you friends, because I have made known to you everything I he ard from my F ather. That' s from the Gosp el of John, chapter fif teen, verse fif teen. And again: But when that Sp irit of Tr uth comes, he will te ach you all truth. That' s from the Gosp el of John, chapter six teen, verse thirteen.
B ut if perhaps someone ob jects about Jud as, who was also one of the ap ost les when these things were said, he should know that the Lord was not ign or ant to whom what he was saying should apply. Just as also when he says: F ather, forg ive them, for they do not know what they do, that' s from the Gosp el of Luke, chapter twenty- three, verse thirty- four, this prayer of his is not consider ed to be under stood about everyone pers ec uting him. For when it says these or you, which are demonstr ative pron ouns, according to the intention of the speaker, the statement is directed either to everyone present equal ly, or to some among them whom he has decided. So also these things that have been stated before are to be referred not to all the ap ost les gener ally, but to the elect alone.
So also perhaps it seems we should under stand that statement where he says: Whatever you b ind on earth will be bound also in he aven. That' s from the Gosp el of Matthew, chapter six teen, verse nine teen. In this, a similar meaning is thought to exist, which the ble ssed Jer ome, att ending car efully, when he came to ex pl ain these words in Matthew, where the Lord says to Peter: Whatever you b ind on earth, says this: Bis hops and pri ests not under stand ing this passage ass ume to themselves some thing of the arr og ance of the Ph ar ise es, so that they either cond emn the inn oc ent or think they can abs olve the gu il ty. Yet before God it is not the sent ence of pri ests that is so ught, but the life of the gu il ty.
W e read in the Book of Lev it ic us about le pers, where they are command ed to show themselves to pri ests. And if they have le pro sy, then they are made uncl ean by the pri est. Not that pri ests make them cle an or uncl ean, but that they have knowledge about le pers and non- le pers and can disc ern who is uncl ean or cle an. There fore, just as there the pri est makes the le per uncl ean, so also here the bis hop or pri est b inds or lo oses not those who are gu il ty or inn oc ent, but according to his office, when he has he ard the var iet ies of sins, he knows who should be bound or who should be lo osed.
F rom these words of Jer ome, unless I am mist aken, it is clear that what was said to Peter or similarly to the other ap ost les about b ind ing or lo os ing the b onds of sins is to be under stood more about their persons than gener ally about all bis hops. Un less perhaps, according to what Jer ome himself says, we under stand this b ind ing or abs ol ution as the afor ement ioned j udgment grant ed gener ally to everyone. N amely, that they themselves should j udge who are to be bound or abs olved by God, and disc ern between cle an and uncl ean.
H ence also that statement of Or igen on the same passage in Matthew, dist ingu ish ing thus the elect bis hops who have mer ited this grace that was grant ed to Peter from the others: Whatever you b ind on earth. For, he says, those who cl aim the place of bis hop use this text just as Peter did, and te ach that the keys of the king dom of he aven were rece ived from Christ, that whoever have been bound by them are bound in he aven, and whoever have been lo osed by them, that is, have rece ived rem ission, are also lo osed in he aven. It must be said that they speak well if they have those works on account of which it was said to Peter: You are Peter. And they are such that the Church of Christ is bu ilt upon them, if the g ates of hell do not prev ail against them. Other wise it is ridicul ous that we should say that he who is bound by the b onds of his own sins and dr ags his sins like a long rope, and his in iqu ities like the y oke- str ap of a he ifer, only because he is called a bis hop, has this kind of power, that those lo osed by him on earth are lo osed in he aven, or those bound on earth are bound in he aven.
L et the bis hop there fore be irr epr oach able who b inds or lo oses another, worth y to b ind or lo ose in he aven. Let him be the husband of one wife, sob er, ch aste, ord erly, hosp it able, te ach able, not add icted to wine, not viol ent, but mod er ate, not qu arr els ome, not a lover of mon ey, man ag ing his own house well, having sub miss ive child ren in all ch ast ity. If he is such, he will not un just ly b ind on earth, nor will he lo ose without j udgment. There fore, whatever such a person lo oses will be lo osed also in he aven, and whatever he b inds on earth will be bound also in he aven. But if someone is, so to speak, Peter, and does not have what is said in this place as if to Peter, and has thought himself able to b ind so that they may be bound in he aven, and to lo ose so that they may be lo osed in he aven, he dece ives himself, not under stand ing the will of Scripture, and being p uff ed up, he falls into the j udgment of the dev il.
Origen clearly demonstrates, as plain reason also confirms, that what we have discussed was granted to Peter but was by no means conferred by the Lord upon all bishops. Rather, it was given only to those who imitate Peter not through the loftiness of their episcopal throne, but through the dignity of their merits.
For those who follow their own will and turn away from God's will cannot do anything against the justice of divine righteousness. When they act unjustly, they cannot incline God toward injustice or make him somehow similar to themselves.
The Lord himself vehemently rebukes such people and threatens them gravely, saying: You wickedly thought that I would be like you. I will rebuke you and set this before your face. Understand this, you who forget God. This comes from the Psalms, chapter forty-nine, verse twenty-one.
Who can be said to forget God more completely, or to be given over to a depraved mind, than the one who arrogates to himself this power: claiming that the divine judgment is subject to his will in binding and loosing his subjects according to his own arbitrary decision? As if his unjust presumption could overturn the supreme justice of God, as if he could make guilty or innocent whomever he wishes.
To prevent anyone from ever making such presumptions, that great teacher of the Church, Augustine, who was himself a distinguished bishop, confronts this in his sixteenth sermon on the Lord's words, saying: You have begun to regard your brother as a tax collector. You bind him on earth. But take care that you bind him justly, for justice breaks unjust chains.
The blessed Gregory also openly asserts, and proves through the Lord's own examples, that ecclesiastical power can accomplish nothing in binding or loosing if it deviates from the equity of justice and does not accord with divine judgment.
This is why he says in his twenty-fifth homily on the Gospels: It often happens that someone holds the position of judge whose life in no way corresponds to that position, and it frequently occurs that he either condemns the undeserving, or while bound himself, he looses others.
Often in loosing or binding his subjects, he follows the impulses of his own will rather than the merits of the cases. Thus it happens that he deprives himself of the very power of binding and loosing when he exercises it according to his own wishes rather than according to the conduct of his subjects.
It often happens that a pastor is moved toward someone by either hatred or favoritism. But those who follow their own interests or favoritism in the cases of their subjects cannot judge worthily concerning them. As the prophet says: They killed souls that should not die, and gave life to souls that should not live.
Indeed, he who condemns the just kills one who should not die, and he who attempts to absolve the guilty from punishment tries to give life to one who will not live. Therefore, cases must be weighed carefully, and only then should the power of binding and loosing be exercised. One must consider what the fault is, and what penitence has followed the fault, so that the pastor's sentence may absolve those whom the Almighty visits through the grace of compunction.
For the presiding authority's absolution is true only when it follows the judgment of the supreme Judge. This is well signified by the raising of Lazarus, who had been dead four days. That miracle demonstrates that the Lord first called the dead man and gave him life, saying: Lazarus, come out. Only afterward was the one who had come out alive unbound by the disciples.
Gregory continues: Behold, the disciples now unbind the one whom the Master had raised from death. For if the disciples had unbound Lazarus while he was still dead, they would have displayed a stench rather than power.
From this consideration we must understand that we ought to loose through pastoral authority only those whom we know our Lord has given life through the grace of resurrection. We recognize this giving of life, which comes before the work of righteousness, already in the confession of sins itself. This is why the dead man is not told: Come back to life, but rather: Come out. It is as if anyone dead in sin were being told plainly: Come out now through confession, you who hide within yourself through negligence.
Let the sinner come out, that is, let him confess his fault. And as he comes out, let the disciples unbind him, so that the pastors of the Church may release the penalty for one who was not ashamed to confess what he had done.
Gregory says further: But whether the pastor binds justly or not, the pastor's sentence should still be feared by the flock, lest the one who is subject, even when perhaps bound unjustly, may deserve that very sentence of binding for some other fault.
He continues: Let whoever is under the hand of a pastor fear being bound, whether justly or unjustly. And let him not rashly criticize his pastor's judgment, lest even if he was bound unjustly, a fault that was not there before may arise from the very pride of his arrogant criticism.
From these statements of Gregory and from examples of divine authority, it is clear that the sentence of bishops has no force if it deviates from divine equity, according to that prophetic statement about wanting to kill or give life to those whom they cannot.
Those bishops who have presumed to deprive their subjects unjustly of communion are themselves deprived of communion by the sentence of bishops.
Thus the African Council, canon two hundred ten, states: Let no bishop rashly deprive anyone of communion. And as long as a bishop does not communicate with someone he has excommunicated, let that bishop not be communicated with by other bishops. This is so that a bishop may be more cautious not to pronounce against anyone what he cannot prove by other evidence.