On the Same Feast: Christ's Dialogue and Peter's Confession

From Sermon 23 of Raoul Ardent's collected sermons found in Volume 155 of Patrologia Latina

Jesus came into the region of 
Caesarea Philippi
 and asked His disciples. 

In this reading from the Holy Gospel, dearest brothers, our Lord and Redeemer does five things. 

First, He came into the region of 
Caesarea Philippi
. 

Second, He asks and hears what people say about Him. 

Third, He asks and hears what the disciples believe about Him. 

Fourth, He commends Peter's answer. 

Fifth, He rewards it. 

Therefore, the Lord, wanting to ask His disciples for a confession of their faith, first leads them into the region of 
Caesarea Philippi
 (a city established by Philip in honor of Tiberius Caesar), where it is said that tributes were traditionally paid to ancient kings. 

The Lord specifically wanted to do this in that place so that in the spot where an earthly king once demanded tributes from his subjects, now the heavenly King would demand the tribute of confession from His disciples. 

The name is fitting too, as Philip means "mouth of the lamp." 

"For with the heart one believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation" 
Romans 10
. 

This shows that the Lord differentiates Himself from an earthly king because, while an earthly king demands a tribute of metal from his subjects, He only requires the tribute of pure confession. 

Hence, He says, "Whoever confesses Me before men, I will also confess him before My Father" 
Matthew 10

Luke 12
. 

This confession is pure when there is harmony between the heart, mouth, and actions in the confession of God. 

Otherwise, it is not a pure or complete confession, and it can only be called a statement, not a confession.

Secondly, the Lord asks what people think of Him when He says, "Who do men say that the Son of Man is?" 

Not because He didn't know, as He knows everything, but to leave us an example for those holding His place in the Church, that we should similarly ask our close ones what reputation we have among people. 

And why is this? 

Because when we indulge ourselves too much, we tend to be unaware of our own faults. 

It is innate in every mind to judge others better than oneself. 

We are hindered by excessive affection when judging ourselves. 

A monkey likes its own little monkey, even if it is ugly; a crow likes its own voice, even if it is hoarse. 

We like our own faults, even if they are hideous and displeasing to others. 

Therefore, my brothers, let us submit the judgment of our lives not to flatterers who do not know how to tell the truth but to honest critics among our close ones. 

Let us urge them not to keep silent about how we are perceived by people and by them. 

If we hear that we have a good reputation, let us attribute it all to God's grace, not to ourselves, and strive to be as we are said to be. 

But if we hear that we are noted for any faults, let us amend our lives for the better and flee not only from vices but even from the shadows of vices, so that such holiness may shine in us that it wipes away all infamy and shuts the mouths of those who speak ill of us.

"Who do men say that the Son of Man is?" He asked. 

In this, my brothers, we must consider why our Redeemer often calls Himself the Son of Man rather than Christ or Jesus. 

He does this for three reasons: 

to remind us how much He humbled Himself for us, 

to assert against the Manichaeans that He truly has human nature, 

and to set an example for us to think and speak humbly about ourselves. 

Behold, the Son of God does not call Himself the Son of God but frequently calls Himself the Son of Man. 

In this, my brothers, He confounds our pride, as we are ashamed to admit our lesser ancestors but always remember the wealthier ones. 

Like the proverbial mule, when asked who our father was, we are ashamed to admit a donkey but boast that our grandfather was a horse. 

Moreover, when they answered, some said John the Baptist, others Elijah, others Jeremiah, or one of the prophets, it shows that popular opinions often disagree and deviate from the truth. 

Hence, my brothers, we should not easily give a credulous ear to popular rumors lest, if we affirm a popular rumor and find the reality different, we ourselves are found to be liars.

Thirdly, the Lord asks His disciples who they say He is.

It is for three reasons: to make them worthy by their confession, to strengthen them in faith, and to praise and reward their confession.

But you, he says, who do you say I am? In which it should be noted that when he previously said, who do people say the Son of Man is? Here he says: But who do you say I am? As if the disciples were not people.

In this, he implies, my brothers, that those who perceived Christ only humanly were people. However, they were not just people, but gods, who perceived him divinely. They were people who acknowledged the humanity they saw. They were spiritual and divine who acknowledged the divinity they did not see.

We too, my brothers, when we only think of what is of the flesh, are carnal and animalistic.

Furthermore, Peter responds to the Lord on behalf of everyone, because it is fitting that he, the first of all, speaks first for all: You are, he says, the Christ, the Son of the living God.

Peter embraces everything in a few words. He confesses not only the Son but also the Father and the Holy Spirit, and also the divine nature and name. He confesses the Father by naming the Son. Also, in the name of Christ, that is, the anointed; he signifies the anointing Father and the anointing Holy Spirit. He asserts Christ's divine nature by calling him the Son of God. He also implies his humanity by calling him Christ, that is, the anointed, for according to his humanity, he could be anointed.

He does not remain silent about the name, calling him Christ, that is, the Messiah, promised in the law. He also adds living, to distinguish him from those whom the pagans consider gods from the dead, or from insensate matter.

God is said to be in three ways: by nature, like Christ; by adoption, like the saints; by estimation, like Jupiter.

Therefore, my brothers, taught by Peter, let us firmly confess Christ, the Son of the living God, so that through this confession, we may, with Peter, deserve the adoption of divinity and strongly avoid the authority of the divinity of the creature.

Fourthly, the Lord commends Peter's response when he says: Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jona, that is, son of John, you understand in the truth of this confession, and yet you do not have this confession from yourself. Hence he adds: For flesh and blood did not reveal this to you, that is, the nature of flesh and blood, or any carnal man, did not reveal this to you. As if he says: You did not have this from yourself, nor from any other man, but my Father, who is in heaven, revealed this to you.

In this, my brothers, the presumption of some is refuted, who, relying on their own intelligence, attempt to investigate heavenly things with human sense, but such people, as Solomon says, are oppressed by glory (Proverbs 25).

Therefore, wandering, not like the apostles inspired by the highest Father, they do not come to one confession, but make various little opinions according to their own will, like those people who had different opinions about Christ, some saying he was John the Baptist, others Elijah, others Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.

Fifthly, the Lord rewards Peter's response in four ways: by the designation of his name, by leadership, by the virtue of perseverance, and by his office. He honors Peter by the designation of his name, calling him Peter from the rock. For just as a rock is firm, suitable for building, sparkles, and emits water, so Peter was firm in confession, most suitable for the building of the Church, emitted sparks of miracles, and emanated the water of wisdom.

He rewards him with leadership when he adds: And on this rock, I will build my Church. For although Christ alone is the shepherd, yet Peter is called the shepherd by him in a derivative sense; and although Christ alone is substantively the foundation of the Church, yet Peter and the other apostles are called foundations of the Church: likewise, although Christ alone is the rock, yet Peter is called rock by derivation from him.

Moreover, the Church is founded on Peter, as he supports it by his office, merit, preaching, example, care, and intercession.

He rewards him with the virtue of perseverance when he adds: And the gates of hell will not prevail against it. The gates of hell are called either sins, or temptations, or torments, or deaths. These do not prevail not only against Christ but not even against Peter of Christ.

They prevail when armed with virtue because it dissolves sins, repels temptations, overcomes torments, and conquers death of both soul and body through the resurrection of both.

And not only does he save himself, but he also pulls many sinners from the very gates and jaws of hell.

And not only him, my brothers, but any faithful person who corrects, advises, or teaches a sinner and rescues them from the devil's jaws, what else do they do but break the gates of hell and bring back captives?

He rewards with this duty when he says:

"And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."

Furthermore, two keys are given equally to all apostles.

Hence, after his resurrection, the Lord, breathing on them, said:

"Receive the Holy Spirit; if you forgive anyone's sins, they are forgiven" (John 20).

However, this speech is directed only to Peter, to show that whoever does not follow the unity of the Church is deprived of the keys to bind and loose.

There are two keys: discretion and power.

With discretion, it is determined who should be bound or loosed; with power, those who should be bound are bound, and those who should be loosed are loosed.

But what can I say today, my brothers, when many priests lack discretion, and many who have discretion abuse the power to bind and loose?

These (which is sad) do not know who should be bound or loosed.

Those who do know, bind what should be loosed out of hatred or love, or loose what should be bound.

But whoever unjustly binds or looses, deprives themselves of the power to bind or loose.

There is only one invisible priest who alone baptizes, absolves, and binds.

His ministers, however, only perform the ministry, not any authority, to bind or loose, that is, to show who is bound or loosed.

Hence, in Leviticus, lepers are commanded to show themselves to the priests (Leviticus 14); who indeed do not make them lepers or clean, but discern whether they are lepers or clean.

Likewise, the Lord alone raised Lazarus from the tomb, and commanded the disciples to unbind him (John 12), not to raise him, but to show him raised.

When a priest lacks discretion or unjustly binds or looses, he whom God binds is not loosed, and he whom God looses is not bound.

Yet, the shepherd's sentence, whether just or unjust, must be feared, lest by despising it, you become bound through that very contempt.

Therefore, let us pray, my brothers, to Peter, the shepherd of our souls, that by his merits and prayers, he may grant us absolution from our sins, fulfill his duty, protect us from the devil with his care, govern us with his rule, and lead us to the pastures of eternal greenness, by the grace of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with the Father and the Holy Spirit, God, forever and ever.

Amen.