Letter Four
To my truly holy and most blessed brother in Christ, Bishop Falcon

As far as I have learned, and proven by actions, it was more of a priority to your blessedness to insult me than to greet me.

What a fitting beginning you gave, to harm me as a bishop before I even saw you as a bishop!

You flew too quickly on tender wings, with a light-hearted spirit, not with the advice of maturity.

Indeed, at the very start of your bishopric, you attempt to enter another's jurisdiction, when you should have respectfully entered your own.

So was it right for you to believe that the Mosomagense Church should be occupied by your illicit ordinations, which the metropolitan of the city of Reims has always governed under the guidance of Christ?

I still think you do not know your own affairs, and you already invade others'.

So, in your haste, you consecrate priests, establish archdeacons, and appoint the head of the most distinguished school and the readers' militia.

I do not complain that you did not consult me in these matters; I wish you had consulted yourself!

For if your holiness was ignorant of the canons, it was very premature to transgress before learning them.

But if you knew the statutes of the churches, it was all the more grievous and dangerous for your foolishness to trample on the decrees of the ancient and magnificent bishops.

Be careful, you who presume to take what is not yours, lest you lose what you seem to have.

Since the rights of the ordination you performed are not valid, with what counsel will you defend the beginnings of your priestly office if you mix the offense of reckless transgression with obstinacy or impotence?

It will be a greater disgrace to have violated an ancient sanction than to be praised for standing against the canons you created.

But what shall I say about the orders of those whom your blessedness has promoted?

It amounts to more, for if we discuss it according to the statutes and severity of our ancestors, not only will their status, but your entire bishopric will come into question.

The Lord in the Gospel says to Peter: "Simon, son of John, do you love me?"

And Peter replies: "Yes, Lord, you know that I love you" (John 21:15).

To whom the Lord commands three times, under this response: "Feed my sheep."

I, because I am completely inexperienced in feeding the sheep of Christ with the abundance of heavenly sustenance, cannot; but being taught by sacred teachings, I advise you to feed those who have been entrusted to me by Christ's command, and forbid you to invade them.

Always act so that what is worthy accompanies you.

Serve the church which, by divine dispensation, you have merited to preside over, and watch over the salvation of the Lord's flock as a diligent shepherd.

I wish my modest resources could suffice for what I desire for you in the name of the Lord!

But since my own are lacking, I do not require the services entrusted to me by the Savior to be saved by a hireling.

John in the Apocalypse (Chapter 2, 3) indeed addresses his seven angels, and writes to each church.

Therefore, the actions and merits are judged as per the precepts of those in charge: what is proven to need correction, he chastises.

Therefore, since the form of pontifical action is delivered under the name of angel, I grieve over the audacity of your presumption, that you, a new one, change ancient laws, a rash one, divine laws to earthly ones.

Let us hear, let those priests you have chosen hear. Your priests themselves should hear us.

I trust that the judgment of the Creator will not be in your favor, but against you, from those judging.

For who, for the integrity of his sense, would not condemn him who broke out against the rule of the Church, who ought to have kept the rule of the Church?

You command, as I hear, that the tributes of the tenants be brought to you, and you order that the revenues of the fields be delivered.

It is understood that you coveted the property of the church, not the church itself, when you anxiously demand what I, to whom they rightfully belonged, remitted rather than sought.

Let it not be hidden from you that the levitas and priests you ordained out of order have already been removed from their office.

For I have considered that it did not befit me to admit those whom it was not lawful for you to ordain.

Alas, how much you have repelled me from the intent of your worship, since you prefer to act wrongly than to keep fraternal bonds!

I had wished that you had remained a cleric since you were made a priest against your will.

In all honesty, I confess that it troubles me just as much that you made an inexcusable mistake as it does that I was treated with contempt.